Health Insurance: How Does It Work?
Four Questions to Ask About Health Care Reform
We rarely have to ask how car insurance or home insurance work. What is it that makes health insurance so much more complicated — with individual mandates, single or multiple payers, and so on? Since Congress is (once again) talking about changing how health care works in America, it may be a good time to explain what makes it so strange. This thing we sometimes call “health insurance” is actually a fusion of three different things, only one and a half of which are “insurance” at all. I’m going to walk through the basics you need to know, and end up with a set of four questions you can ask about any health care proposal that will let you understand what people are really talking about.
(I’m not going to tell you what I think the right answers are, though. This article is to help you ask the right questions — and I’m interested in your answers.)
Not as bad as it looks: this is a mass casualty drill at the Naval Medical Center, San Diego.
Let’s start by talking about what insurance actually is. The first modern version of insurance was invented in the Netherlands in the 1600’s, when people were finding that sending a ship on a trading voyage could be very profitable. The good news was that you could make back the whole cost of your investment (a ship, a crew, some things to start trading with) in just a few voyages; the bad news is that a lot of voyages also ended up with shipwrecks, which would take your entire investment to the bottom of the ocean.
Let’s say for simplicity that it would take you ten voyages to make back the cost of a ship, and one voyage out of twenty got shipwrecked. Suddenly, your life depends a lot on luck: if that shipwreck happens on your eleventh voyage, you’ve got enough saved up to buy a new ship and keep going. If that shipwreck happened on the tenth voyage, though, you were screwed.
Pretty soon, some fairly wealthy men figured out a way to fix this: they would offer an “insurance contract,” where before each voyage, a shipowner would pay them one-twentieth the cost of a ship plus a fee, and if they were shipwrecked, they would get paid the full cost of getting a new ship. Both sides came out happy: on the average, the insurer was earning the fee for each voyage, and the shipowners had turned an unpredictable, possibly catastrophic, expense into a regular, predictable one.
This is the simplest kind of insurance: it takes a large (but known) expense that might happen at an unpredictable time, and splits it up into a lot of small expenses that you can plan for. Your homeowner’s insurance today is basically the same kind of thing.
There have been lots of improvements to this idea over the years. One that’s particularly relevant to us is actuarial science: the development of professional experts in figuring out the odds. In the story above, the insurer was charging one-twentieth the cost of the ship plus a fee, because he knew the cost of a ship and could estimate that one voyage in twenty shipwrecked. But if he predicted those odds wrong, he could be in trouble: too high an estimate would mean he was charging people too much, and they would go to his competitors (often just a few tables down at the café). Too low an estimate, and he’d be paying out more than he collected in premiums, and could go bankrupt within the week. So hiring a lot of clever people to figure out just how likely these events were became very important.
One of the first things actuaries realized is that not all voyages are equal. A trading voyage from Eemshaven to London is a lot less risky than one to Shanghai. A well-crewed boat in good repair is less risky than one that looks like it may sink if someone sneezes too loudly. An experienced crew is safer than a green one. This means that insurers could — and should — charge different voyages different rates. The perfect insurance contract is one where everyone knows the exact odds of something going wrong.
Each of these cases has something in common: everyone knows and can agree upon the price of the thing being insured. But sometimes, you want to insure against something that you know will be very expensive, but whose actual cost you don’t know ahead of time — say, the liability insurance on your car, which is insuring against the medical bills of someone injured in an accident. How does an insurer know how much to charge? And what if it’s a “catastrophic” event, one that ends up being so expensive that the total premiums that the person buying the insurance would never pay that much over their entire lives?
It turns out that you can meaningfully insure these too, so long as the actuaries can figure out the average costs, and figure out the odds of different possible expenses; you just spread these costs over the whole pool of insured people. If you know that one person out of every thousand will have a million-dollar expense, and you’ve got 10,000 customers, then you can expect to make $10M in payouts over the years, and price your premiums at $1,000 apiece plus a fee. This works out even though none of those ten people will ever pay $1M in premiums; the lucky ones pay, the unlucky ones get paid back.
At first glance, this kind of “catastrophic event insurance” works a lot like ordinary insurance; by spreading risk over the entire pool of insured people, it lets people insure not just against events which they could pay for if the cost were spread out over their entire lifetime (like ordinary insurance), but even against events which you couldn’t pay for.
But catastrophic insurance is only sort-of insurance: it has a fundamental problem. Imagine that one day, someone figures out that the one-in-1,000 odds above aren’t as simple as we thought: there are actually two groups of people (maybe good and bad drivers, or maybe people with different risks for some disease) that have different odds. That one-in-1,000 actually breaks down to 90% of people having a one-in-10,000 chance, and 10% of people having a one-in-100 chance. If you were charging people based on their odds, like ordinary insurance does, then 90% of people would be paying $100 instead of $1,000, and the other 10% would be paying $10,000.
What this means is that, when everyone is paying the same rate, the “safe” people are really subsidizing the “unsafe” people. And so long as nobody can tell which pool anyone is in, that’s how all insurance works. But as soon as people get a better understanding of risk, things change. If catastrophic insurance is being sold on the free market, things change quickly: even if one insurer decided to ignore it and keep charging everyone $1,000, someone else could show up and insure 90% of their customers for only $100. Pretty soon they’d have all of those customers, and the original insurer would be left with just the 10% with higher risk; they’d have to raise their rate to $10,000 just to avoid going bankrupt!
That is, everyone would end up charging the same rates that they would if this were ordinary insurance; there’s no way (in the free market) for the insurers to spread the costs around. It becomes impossible to insure against events which cost more than any one person could afford.
The only way to prevent this is to move away from a perfectly free market. If insurers were forbidden to change their rates or refuse customers based on this criterion, then you could keep everyone paying the same $1,000, and everyone would still be insured against this risk.
Of course, this doesn’t come for free; what you’ve effectively done is say that we will cover this risk, and everyone has to pony up to cover it. That is, this is a kind of tax; it can happen the way described above, with insurers required to cover something and the cost being spread across everyone insured, or it could be done as a literal tax, with everyone paying in and some central service paying out and no private companies involved, or as anything in between. Whether this is a good or bad idea depends on the situation.
The upshot is this: catastrophic insurance (which spreads people’s costs across the whole population) is unstable as a free-market good, because as knowledge of risks improves, it turns into “ordinary” insurance (which spreads an individual’s costs across time). If its cost as ordinary insurance is more than people can afford — that is, if the thing being insured against is something which people simply couldn’t pay for if it happened, like cancer treatment or accident liability — then that risk becomes uninsurable. The alternative is to make a social decision that payment for this (we can’t really call it “insurance” anymore) is going to be made out of a fund that everyone chips in to; which is to say, a tax, which pays for the benefit that people are now protected from a risk which can’t be protected against via insurance. That decision amounts to saying “everyone is chipping in to pay for X when it happens to people.”
So whenever there’s a kind of catastrophic event that people might want to insure against, we should think about it the same way we do about a tax. Is it worth it? How will the costs be distributed among people? How will the benefits be distributed? Is it better to do this with insurance rates or a literal tax? This is the question we have to ask about any kind of catastrophic insurance, whenever we either have figured out a way to split up the risk pool, or when we think that’s likely to happen in the near future.
There’s one other thing that turns out to work almost the same as catastrophic insurance: pre-existing conditions. These are just like ordinary medical conditions (either of the sort that require ordinary or catastrophic insurance), but it’s not about people with a high risk of having something, but people with a certainty of already having it. That means that the only reasonable “premium” you could charge them is the full cost of treatment plus a fee. Since that’s more than the cost of treatment, you would have to be an idiot to pay that; pre-existing conditions aren’t insurable at all.
Like with catastrophic insurance, we have two basic options: leave it to the market, with pre-existing conditions uninsurable, or require insurers by law to accept people with pre-existing conditions. (In fact, we always did this in some ways, because otherwise an insurer could say you had a “pre-existing” condition the moment you got sick, and kick you off insurance before paying a dime. That way they would get to keep all your premiums and never have to pay out anything, which would be fantastic from their perspective. Insurance contracts don’t allow this — but insurers are quite known for finding ways around that, such as pressuring employers to fire people whose family members are seriously ill, or face having their own premiums spike.)
The problem with requiring that insurers accept people with pre-existing conditions is what happens when people move from insurer to insurer. If insurers were required to accept you, you would just not bother having insurance at all until you got sick, and then get insurance, pay a small premium, and have everything paid for; the insurer would go bankrupt overnight. This is just the same as the situation with catastrophic insurance, except now instead of two insurers competing and all the low-risk people going to the cheap one, each insurer would be competing with “no insurance at all.”
This is the origin of the “individual mandate” in the ACA: if you want to require insurers to cover pre-existing conditions, you also have to ban individuals from not having insurance. And since literally banning it (with a prison sentence?) seems like a terrible idea, the ACA compromised with a fine.
If we put this together, there are two options for how you handle pre-existing conditions:
Option 1: Insurers aren’t required to cover pre-existing conditions; anyone who has to change insurers when they have an illness is uninsurable.
Option 2: Insurers are required to cover pre-existing conditions; we spread the cost out over everyone by requiring everyone to buy insurance.
There are three similar options for catastrophic insurance:
Option 1: Insurers can charge different risk groups different amounts for this kind of catastrophic event; catastrophic insurance turns into ordinary insurance as our understanding of risk gets better, and people at high risk for this event are uninsurable.
Option 2: Insurers are required to charge different risk groups the same for this kind of event; the cost of handling it is spread out over everyone through the premiums.
Option 3: Ordinary insurers don’t handle this kind of event at all; we set up a separate system that takes in a fee spread across everyone (i.e. a tax) and pays for treatment.
The first two options are just like the ones for pre-existing conditions. The analogue of the third one would be if we said that for any condition that can be pre-existing and that individuals couldn’t usefully pay for on the spot, the idea of “private insurance” doesn’t really work, and so we have a central system to handle it.
Summarized another way, “insurance” for catastrophic events or pre-existing conditions doesn’t really behave like insurance; if you try to sell that on the free market, it quickly ceases to exist. So if you want it to exist — that is, if you want there to be a payment mechanism other than cash on the barrelhead — for any such conditions, you have to create it outside the market, by law, and require the costs to be spread out. The difference between options 2 and 3 is just about whether private companies operate it day-to-day.
Any health care proposal that involves any spreading out of costs faces the same question as a tax proposal: how do we spread out that cost?
All three of these options have been used in real life. For pre-existing conditions, option 1 is what we did in the US before the ACA; option 2 is what we do today. For catastrophic conditions, most kinds of insurance start out as option 1 and gradually evolve to option 2 as our understanding of risk gets better; if something is completely uninsurable and no company wants to deal with it (like flood insurance for houses, uninsurable because everyone gets flooded at once) then we often move to option 3.
Option 3 is also popular in many countries for health insurance, where it’s called a “single-payer” system. This has the advantage of combining a solution to the catastrophic and pre-existing care system with the fact that health care access doesn’t work well on a market, either; it’s basically saying that health insurance, as a whole, doesn’t really work as a free-market good, and if we’re going to have it we have to build it as a big social project, much like we do the roads. It has the downside of pushing everyone into a single system, which is why many countries actually use a hybrid: there’s a central single-payer system that everyone uses, and you can also buy additional insurance (with maybe access to different kinds of hospital or doctor as well) on the open market.
We also don’t have to make the same choice for each kind of insurance. Your car’s liability insurance, for example, works by something between options 1 and 2, while if you have any flood insurance you bought it through a semi-governmental system using option 3.
One final thing to remember is that whenever we’re “spreading out the cost,” there’s no opt-out by definition. But some people can’t pay that cost; what happens to them? This is the same problem that we encounter with any tax — taxes are, after all, just us paying for something (be it roads or armies) that we’ve decided as a society we need to build, even though there’s no good way to do it individually. So any health care proposal that involves any spreading out of costs faces the same question as a tax proposal: how do we spread out that cost? (And if we’re using a fine, rather than the tax system, to charge it, what happens to people who can’t pay?)
So let’s look at health care. Health care includes the full range of event types: manageable and predictable events, like kids getting strep or breaking their arms, and giant and unpredictable ones, like cancer. It includes lots of “pre-existing conditions” if there’s any situation in which you might have to change insurers, especially if you can’t control that. (Such as due to a layoff)
From Wikimedia Commons
But the thing we call “health insurance” also contains a third item, which has nothing to do with insurance at all — instead, it has to do with the strange way medical payments work.
If you walk into a hospital and ask how much a procedure will cost, you probably won’t get a straight answer. If you do, it will be heart-stoppingly high: $250 for a small bottle of apple juice as a “rehydration supplement,” $1,000 for ten minutes of a doctor’s time, and so on. The reason is that health care is paid for through a complicated system which barely involves either the doctor or the patient; instead, the medical facility bills the insurance company. And a big part of the contract negotiation between the two, when that provider and that insurer agree to work together, is an agreement on how much each item will cost. But the resulting contract is secret; neither side wants its competitors to know what kind of deal it made. The “official” prices that a provider charges are nothing more than the starting point in a negotiation, where the insurer might want lower costs for blood tests and accept higher costs for hospital beds.
But if you walk into a hospital without insurance, you’re not covered by any of those deals — so the price you’ll get charged is the list price, a price never meant to be paid by anyone. And those are prices which would instantly drive someone into bankruptcy.
(Then this whole story is repeated when insurance companies negotiate with employers to sell them insurance for their workers; the cost you pay if you need to buy insurance individually is far higher than the cost a big company that’s buying policies for ten thousand people is paying.)
What ends up happening in practice is that if you don’t have insurance, you simply don’t go in for routine care; you can only go to the emergency room, where they are required to treat everyone who comes in the door. (Which is another example of a societal decision to subsidize something!) Of course, you then get billed a tremendous amount, and have to try to negotiate with the hospital to reduce this to something payable — but now they have all the leverage, since you owe a debt.
So this third aspect of health insurance really has nothing to do with insurance at all: it’s that being signed up with an insurer gives you access to that insurer’s negotiated prices, without which you can’t get access to medical care at all.
We’ve already seen that ordinary insurance works well on free markets, and catastrophic and pre-existing insurance doesn’t work there at all. Health care access sits somewhere in the middle: you could sell it on the free market, but that turns out to be bad for almost everyone. For example, if health care access were something you bought, but emergency rooms were still required to treat anyone who came in the door (changing which is likely to go down very badly with anyone who’s sworn the Hippocratic Oath), then this would be equivalent to saying “people who can’t afford health care access go to the ER.” But emergency treatment is a lot more expensive than preventive care, not least because by the time you’ve gone to the ER (and are facing the potentially ruinous bills that would follow), you’re a lot sicker than you would have been beforehand. That imposes costs on the hospitals (who have lots of indigent patients to treat), on the people who are getting much sicker, on their employers or customers who have people who are sicker and can’t work, on their families, on other patients at the ER who have to wait because there are a lot of seriously ill people showing up who wouldn’t have been as sick otherwise, and most dangerously of all, on society as a whole when contagious diseases start going around — pertussis doesn’t give a damn what kind of health care policy you’ve put in place or how much money you have.
That is, a sick population creates lots of deadweight costs for everybody around, and preventive care reduces those costs across the board, creating a net profit for society. This means there are some kinds of care which everyone has an incentive to make as widely available as possible. You could sell access to those on the free market, but it’s almost certainly a terrible idea.
To sum up, we have three different things, all bundled under the misleading name “health insurance:”
Ordinary health insurance, which splits up the cost of your expected lifetime medical bills over time;
Catastrophic health insurance, which splits up the cost of rare expenses so big that people couldn’t pay them across everyone; and
Access to the health care system itself.
And these have different requirements. Most importantly, ordinary health insurance is something you can sell on the free market — but catastrophic health insurance, and insurance for pre-existing conditions, isn’t. It exists if and only if we decide to spread out its costs across the wider population, which means some kind of law (basically, a tax) to do it. Health care access can be sold as a free-market good, but there are some aspects of health care access which, if we make them available to the public as a whole, create huge across-the-board wins.
When you start seeing proposals for health care laws, here are some questions you should ask:
How does the proposal handle people getting health care access? If it doesn’t simply give it to everyone by fiat, what happens for people without it? If it does, how is that managed and paid for? Which kinds of care, if any, do we actively try to make available for everybody?
Does the proposal provide ordinary health insurance at market rates? If not, how does it change that?
How does the proposal handle catastrophic and pre-existing coverage? Does it use option 1 (don’t insure it), option 2 (private insurers but we spread out the cost), or option 3 (one central insurer and we spread out the cost)?
If we are spreading out the costs for any situation, what happens to people who can’t afford that cost?
These are the questions you have to ask no matter whose proposal you’re looking at. Do we insure people with a high risk of cancer? If so, how do we spread out the cost? What mechanism do we use to collect that — insurance premiums and fines, an overall tax payment, something else? If not, what do we do with people at risk for cancer?
I’m not telling you the answers to any of these questions — just showing you the questions you’ll have to ask. The answers are good things to argue over with your friends and Congressthings.
The law we have today in the US is a strange sort of mish-mash. Everyone is required to get insurance, with various exceptions, or pay a fine. That insurance provides a combination of health care access, ordinary health insurance, and catastrophic and pre-existing care insurance, all done using option 2. The requirement to get insurance is the way we spread out the cost, and there’s a system of refunds to reduce the cost for people who can’t afford it. (Unfortunately, because of Congressional roadblock, those refunds are set at the “first guess” values which were in the original bill, and nobody’s been able to adjust them to what people actually need — which is what had to be done for every other system like this in the world.) People in any of those exceptions who don’t get insurance get none of the above, including health care access.
There are various ideas about “health savings accounts” being floated, and if one gets suggested soon, you should ask these questions about it. HSA’s on their own provide ordinary insurance, but neither access nor catastrophic insurance; they literally mean that you save up your money against the chance of getting sick in the future. (In this way, they’re awfully similar to “no health insurance,” since you could always do that to begin with — unless you find yourself like that shipowner whose ship went down before he had ten successful voyages, in which case you’re SOL.) This means that HSA’s have to be coupled with something else… but what else? That’s the $100-billion question.
As for other ideas… who knows? Take a look at whatever comes up, and ask these questions about it. It’ll make it a lot easier for you to navigate between competing ideas.

Disrupting insurance
For most of 2015 I have been banging on about disrupting insurance (or Instech, if you like that kind of jargon). I’d like to use this blog post to talk about why I find it exciting.
1. Insurance is an enormous market
Life insurance premiums are $2.3 trillion globally. Non-life insurance premiums are $1.4 trillion globally. (both numbers are from 2012, from Mckinsey report linked to below). I don’t get to write the word trillion often when looking at market sizes.
Importantly for a European VC, Europe is a disproportionately large chunk of this, coming in at $700B of life and $400B of non-life . And London, as the place insurance was invested, remains its biggest global hub
2. Incumbents face a number of challenges
The insurance industry in Europe and the US is mostly composed today of large traditional insurers who have been operating for decades or centuries. They have struggled to adapt to a digital age, as shown by the graph from BCG below. Similarly to banks, their backend software and underwriting is tied into legacy software from previous decades, with major system integration challenges.
https://www.bcgperspectives.com/content/articles/insurance_technology_strategy_evolution_revolution_how_insurers_stay_relevant_digital_world/
Insurers also have very little contact with their customers, contributing to low brand loyalty and retention.
In many countries and verticals insurance is still mostly distributed via expensive offline broker networks. Insurers are often tied to these networks, making it very hard for them to move to direct/online distribution. For a typical insurer distribution costs are significantly higher than all their other non-claims costs combined. Regulatory change in some countries is forcing insurers to make brokerage costs more explicit, which could well lead to customer backlash
3. Technology can be highly disruptive in insurance
Technology can have a huge impact on every important aspect of insurance. Distribution was the first part of insurance to be disrupted, with insurance comparison engines such as Moneysupermarket and Check24. Further disruptive mobile-first distribution models are emerging. On the underwriting side there is a huge volume of new data available (telematics, mobile phone, health tracking etc.) with which to make decisions. And there are new machine learning techniques to work with existing data. Smartphones allow a much more efficient and pleasant claims experience. Personalization software and machine learning enable ‘segment of one’ insurance. The list goes on. You can download a good report on this by BCG here
4. There are obstacles to entering the industry
It wouldn’t be an achievement if it was too easy. Insurance presents startups with a number of barriers to entry, of which the most significant are:
Regulation. Insurance is (with good reason) a highly regulated industry, and regulations vary by country (and by state in the US). To get going in the UK, for example, you need to get into the nitty gritty of brokers, MGAs, reinsurers, Solvency II, warehousing etc etc. You also need to understand a different set of accounting standards and terminology
Balance sheet. Once you get through the regulation above, you need to prove that you have the balance sheet to be able to pay up for claims in any eventuality. This requires serious capital before you can write your first policy.
Partnering with incumbents. Both of the above make it near-impossible to start afresh, unless you can raise Oscar-like $100M+ sums . Any other Instech startup is going to need to partner with existing insurers. This presents a number of challenges and limits flexibility. Some insurers are trying to encourage innovation (e.g. axastrategicventures.com/) but good intentions are confronted by big company politics, vested interests and ‘not invented here’ syndrome.
Historic data. If you are going to get into underwriting insurance you need historic claims data on which to base your decisions. However this data is privately held by insurers. Building up enough data over a long enough time frame (given that claims are infrequent events) is a real challenge. Without it there is a danger of startups mispricing risk.
5. These obstacles put off the big tech players
For the likes of Alphabet/Google, Facebook and Amazon insurance is too hard and too boring. When you have a huge warchest self-driving cars and drones are much more interesting areas to explore. In the war for engineering talent it is hard to get your best developers to work on financial services. When I was with Google in 2007–09 I worked on the early days of ‘Google Compare’. Despite much hand-wringing in the insurance industry this hasn’t gone anywhere. It’s just not high enough up Google’s priority list.

6. Despite the obstacles there are success stories
Ma Mingzhe http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/25/business/chinese-insurers-regulatory-win-benefits-a-leaders-family.html?_r=0
Ping An is one of the most impressive growth stories of any company globally. It was founded in 1988 in Shenzhen and was the first insurance company in China to adopt a shareholding structure. It took the nascent Chinese insurance industry and put a rocket under it, going IPO in 2004 at a $10B valuation,. It is now worth $100B. Ping An has always been a technology-led company and continues to lead the way in tech-led innovation. You can read more on this in the BCG reports below.
Moneysupemarket was the first player to really crack insurance comparison, allowing users to type on their details once and receive competing quotes from dozens of insurers. It was quickly copied, leading to a fierce TV and Google ad spending war with Comparethemarket, Confused and Gocompare that continues to this day. Despite this it is still worth almost $3B.
esure was founded in 2000, went public in 2013 and is now worth $1.5B. Its success has been built on on efficient low cost operations, and building brands (both esure and Sheilas’ Wheels ). It also owns Gocompare, one of the players in the UK comparison market.
7. There are a number of impressive startups emerging, but there is room for plenty more
Over the last year I have seen a step change in the number of startups going after insurance. But this change has been from ‘almost none’ to ‘a trickle’. Tiny in comparison to the huge number of startups going after the similar-sized fintech market.
Below I highlight a few of the areas in which I see Instech startups emerging.
Insurance distribution beyond comparison:
This is the most obvious area for startups to address, as it is not subject to many of the challenges above (less regulated, no balance sheet, no underwriting). A few interesting new players:
Knip. Mobile-first insurance concierge. Initial proposition for users is to remove admin pain: have all of your insurance policies in one place. Over time there is the potential to be a user’s trusted insurance advisor, recommending where they should increase/decrease cover and who they should insure with. Started in Switzerland, now taking on German market with competition from Safe and Clark. Policy Genius in the US is a different twist on the insurance concierge concept.
Boughtbymany. Social distribution for niche insurance. Boughtbymany finds niche groups who have challenges finding good insurance today (e.g. diabeticus, young drivers). It plugs into these affinity groups to push specially-designed insurance products to them.

Simplesurance. Seamless insurance cross-sell at checkout. The idea of selling insurance for high value items at point of purchase is not a new one. Simplesurance’s innovation is to make it as frictionless as possible for users and online retailers.
New forms of capital provision / peer to peer
In our persistent low interest rate environment new capital is flowing into the insurance industry in search of returns. One manifestation of this is hedge funds getting into reinsurance.
As a startup one opportunity is peer to peer insurance, where a group of members pay out cover some or all of claims made by the group. In some ways this goes back to the original concept of cooperative insurance. The advantages should be less fraud, lower acquisition costs (through referrals/social), greater loyalty and over time better pricing.
Friendsurance in Berlin was the first company with this approach.
Guevara in London is a different take on the P2P concept.
New sources of data
Connected devices and other online data offer insurers a huge amount of additional data on their insured risks. The first success story has been telematics for car insurance, where your driving behaviour affects your premium. A number of good businesses have been created, such as Insurethebox which sold 75% of the business at a valuation of ~$200M earlier this year. However so far telematics has remained a niche product, in particular addressing young drivers. Connected cars and ubiquitous smartphones will take it to the mass market.
Going forward there are many more opportunities to use connected hardware to refine insurance: wearable devices for healthcare, smart homes for home insurance, mobile phones for almost anything. There is also the opportunity to use people’s online presence and social networks to reduce fraud and (possibly) improve underwriting.
A few examples in this area:
Climate Corp Collecting weather data with high precision, offering farmers crop insurance and in depth analytics.
Metromile. In the car insurance telematics space, but using your smartphone to collect data, and a new pricing approach (pay per mile).
Vitality Keeping fit and healthy reduces your health insurance costs. Data takin in from partners and wearable devices. Has grown to 5.5M members. Oscar are also using data from wearable devices for their insurance.
Reinventing the insurance experience
This is a broad category, including changing how claims are handled, how insurance is sold and how it is bundled with other services.
Oscar is the best example of this, reinventing US medical insurance from the bottom up. It has been well covered by the tech press so I won’t go into it further here.
Aircare is part of Berkshire Hathaway, but worth a quick mention as it eliminates claims completely — it automatically pays out if your flight is delayed. Claims management is the most painful part of dealing with an insurer, with expensive offline measures to try to combat fraud. As everything we do becomes connected (starting with our car) the concept of ‘claiming’ may become an anachronism.
New verticals
There is always a new category emerging for insurance. Smartphone insurance has seen huge growth. Cyberinsurance is a current hot topic. However addressing these new lines of business is something that insurance insiders are pretty good at. Unless a startup can come in with a real tech advantage (which in cyberinsurance might be possible) the worry is that new segments quickly become competitive.
New markets.
The insurance market is still in its early stages in much of the developing world, offering opportunity for land grab. Compare Asia is an example of one company addressing this. DirectAsia, acquired by Hiscox, is another.
SaaS to help the insurance industry keep up.
The insurance industry is more than big enough for a SaaS provider focussed on the industry to build a $B business. There is a lot of excel still being used. The question is which parts of insurance require unique software, as opposed to a slight customisation of generic business intelligence, CRM or machine learning SaaS packages. A couple of insurance-specific SaaS companies are Quantemplate, offering business intelligence and data warehousing, and Shift Technology in fraud detection. Balderton’s portfolio company InterResolve are a different sort of B2B insurance company, with a technology-led approach to insurance claims mediation.
What I am looking for as a VC in insurance
Finally, a quick summary of what I look for as a VC in insurance startups:
Founding team who combine deep understanding of the insurance industry with an external, tech-led DNA. This probably means two founders, or a truly exceptional founder who can combine both. This is not an industry you can bluff your way through. On the flip side, I worry that a team of insurance industry insiders will struggle to break from industry norms.
Real tech DNA in the company (something I look for in any sector).
A clear focus on the customer, not the insurer / partner.
Simplicity: an ability to take a complex industry and present it in a beautiful way using plain language.
Mobile-first.
If you are an insurance startup in Europe than I haven’t spoken to before, please contact me!
Further Reading
Yann Ranchere of Anthemis on the same topic: http://tekfin.com/2015/05/06/is-the-insurance-industry-about-to-radically-change/
BCG report 1:
Insurance and Technology: The Disruptive Force of Insurance Ecosystems
New insurance-industry ecosystems, driven by digital technologies, could disrupt the industry, usher in noninsurance…www.bcgperspectives.com
BCG Report 2: https://www.bcgperspectives.com/content/articles/insurance_technology_strategy_evolution_revolution_how_insurers_stay_relevant_digital_world/
Investors Are Poised to Disrupt the Tech-Averse Insurance Industry
Investors have set their sights on insurance tech. Ripe for disruption, this antiquated industry has a large and…www.entrepreneur.com
Techcrunch: http://techcrunch.com/2015/08/05/insurance-is-the-next-frontier-for-fintech/
Wired: http://www.wired.com/2015/07/tech-upended-banks-stock-trading-insurance-next/
Mckinsey insurance industry overview: http://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/dotcom/client_service/Financial%20Services/Latest%20thinking/Insurance/Global_insurance_industry_insights_An_in-depth_perspective.ashx
http://insnerds.com/2015/06/29/the-uber-of-insurance/

How Much Did Jesus Bill Lazarus’ Insurance?
http://robotorgy.tumblr.com/
Whose Rights Would Jesus Revoke?
Whose Grandmother Would Jesus Deport?
How Many Guns Would Jesus Own?
How Many Homes Would Jesus Foreclose?
To Whom Would Jesus Give His 501c3?
How Much Did Jesus Bill Lazarus’ Insurance?
How Many Pussies Would Jesus Grab?
Who Would Jesus Bomb?
Whose Lives Did Jesus Say Matter?
How Much Did Jesus Teach You to Hate?

Insurance Startups — Market Ecosystem Map

Last night, Sarah Tavel and I hosted a small dinner for founders and builders of insurance startups, and I was fascinated by this market. I wanted to dive deeper into this space and share some market observations.
Some caveats before we dive into the analysis.
This ecosystem map is not designed to be 100% comprehensive. It’s to understand all the different startups within the insurance space
If I am missing something, tweet me @mccannatron.
This space is developing quickly so take this into consideration.
Market Map
Graphic is above and a full list of all of the companies on the market map is below.
Reflections on the insurance market
The insurance market is huge — insurance premiums are $1.2 trillion dollars per year in the U.S. alone.
Of this total spend: 56% goes into life and health insurance and 44% goes into property/casualty insurance (which includes auto, home, and commercial).
Insurance today is typically sold through agents, which creates a steep customer acquisition cost for carriers — ~90% of premiums were sold through independent agents or affiliated agents of the insurer.
Two of the largest forms of insurance are conscripted: you must have auto insurance if you drive a vehicle and under Obamacare you must have health insurance. Getting consumers to care about other forms of insurance is no easy task.
What is changing in the insurance space (why now)
Most of the startups in the ecosystem are taking advantage of one or more of the major forces in the market today.
New channels (web/mobile) — Currently the bulk of insurance is sold through agents in-person or over the phone — however the next generation of consumers is used to purchasing goods directly online. Through mobile we now have the ability to sell insurance directly at the point of need, in real-time, and in shorter durations.
New sources of data (big data, machine intelligence, wearables, connected cars) — We now have the ability to collect more data which potentially could better inform the insurance risk models we use today.
Potential for new types of insurance — sharing economy (where people are both providers and consumers), self driving cars (no need for personal auto insurance), internet of things (both a new data source, and a new attack vector), cyber-security (a new form of major risk)
Potential for new structures of insurance (P2P, lowering the barriers of self insurance) — Some startups are trying to reinvent the entire model of insurance and apply new models to the business of insurance.
Key Question
If you are building a startup in the insurance space, a key question you should ask is:
Are you innovating on the sales channel of insurance or are you innovating on the product level (aka. trying to create a next-gen carrier)?
Both are viable but depending on your end goal, you will have very different considerations on how you enter and compete in the market.
Additional resources
If you are looking to learn more about the insurance space, I highly recommend you check out this four part series written by Kyle Nakatsuji:
https://www.cbinsights.com/blog/transforming-insurance-distribution/ — intent vs. opportunistic types of insurance products.
https://medium.com/@kylenakatsuji/insurance-2-0-new-products-and-combined-approaches-4e75d333892d#.g7k18oey4 — how to rethink the product level of insurance.
https://medium.com/@kylenakatsuji/insurance-2-0-p2p-and-structural-innovation-94ee6bf5643c#.8gxx89cjz — how to rethink the structural level of insurance.
https://medium.com/@kylenakatsuji/so-your-startup-wants-to-sell-insurance-a0167581f7b1#.6jraw5xwe — breakdown of sales channels for insurance products.
Breakdown of all of the companies on the market map
Comparison Insurance
PolicyGenius — Raised $20M, online price comparison for insurance. All types of insurance.
Coverfox — Raised $12M, creating a comparison site for largely auto insurance.
Coverhound — Raised $56M, creating a insurance comparison site — also offering fulfillment services during the insuring process.
Insurify — Raised $2M, creating a virtual insurance agent to compare and recommend auto insurance options.
Goji — Raised $70M. Creating an online auto insurance comparison site.
Insureon — Raised $31M, comparison site for business insurance.
Next Insurance — Raised $13M, building a product to compare and purchase business insurance.
Zebra — Raised $20M, comparison site for car insurance.
Credit Karma — A platform for credit scores, also offers a insurance comparison site.
NerdWallet — Credit card comparison site, also offers an insurance comparison site.
QuoteWizard — Bootstrapped, N/A funding. An insurance comparison site, reportedly approaching $100M in revenue.
GetInsured — Raised an unknown amount from Bessemer and Trinity, a comparison shopping site for health insurance.
HoneyInsurance — Health insurance recommendation engine, part of the YCombinator Fellowship
Pure lead-generation
Datalot — Unknown funding amount, pay-per-call lead provider for mainly insurance carriers
MediaAlpha — Unknown funding amount — programmatic lead generation, largely for insurance companies.
Life
Ladder — Still in stealth, in the life insurance space.
Abaris — Raised $720K, creating a new type of annuity insurance for retirement.
Sure — Raised $2.5M Micro-duration life insurance coverage during travel.
Sureify — Engagement platform between clients and the insurance carriers. Creates potential upsell opportunities.
Haven Life — Not a startup per-se but a new full stack life insurance company which was funded, owned, and started by Mass Mutual.
Auto
Metromile — Raised $14M. Creating a new type of auto insurance — pay-per-mile car insurance. Policies are underwritten by National General Insurance.
TrueMotion (Censio) — Raised $10M, Creating behavior based car insurance.
Cuvva — Raised $750K, Creating a per hour auto insurance product, focused for the UK.
Snapsheet — Raised $11M, greatly improves the claims process for carriers.
Auto/Telematics
Driveway Software — Raised $11M. Collects telematics data to rank how well you drive, potentially to sell this information to insurance companies. Doesn’t sell insurance directly.
Automatic — Raised $24M. Collects telematics data through both hardware adapter and mobile app. Provides data to insurance companies but doesn’t sell insurance directly.
Greenroad — Raised $98M, Israeli based telematics company which sells mainly into commercial fleet operators.
Health
Oscar — Raised $727M, trying to build next gen health insurance from the ground up. They are attempting to be a next gen insurance carrier, not just a broker.
Clover Health — Raised $135M, creating a new type of health insurance that uses data to be proactive about improving their clients health outcomes. I believe they act as the carrier as well.
Collective Health — Raised $125M, creating a platform to make it easier for SMB’s to self insure, rather than using standard plans from traditional carriers.
Melody Health Insurance — stealth, trying to create a new type of lower cost health insurance.
Sherpaa — Raised $8M. Connects employees directly with doctors (telemedicine) and also offers guides to help in the insurance selection process.
Limelight Health — Raised $3M. Building a white labeled insurance quoting app for brokers and agencies.
SMB/HR
Zenefits — Raised $583M. Creating a cloud HR platform which also sells- insurance to SMB’s — however they have been in a bit of trouble recently
Gusto — Raised $161M. Platform from SMB’s to manage payroll, benefits, and workers comp — including insurance.
Namely — Raised $107M. HR and benefits platform, also offers insurance through the platform.
JustWorks Raised $53M. Building a platform for payroll, benefits, and compliance — including insurance.
MaxwellHealth — Raised $56M. Software platform for SMB’s to manage health plans, benefits, and payroll.
SimplyInsured — Raised $8.4M. Creating a health insurance platform for SMBs — to find and administer health insurance. Was part of YC.
Embroker — Raised $14M. Platform for purchasing and managing business insurance — including property and casualty insurance.
Coverwallet — Raised $2M.Platform for purchasing and managing business insurance.
Sharing economy
Stride Health — Raised $15M, Health insurance broker for freelancers and independent contractors, most notably used by Uber drivers.
Slice Labs — Raised $3.9M. On-demand insurance for on-demand workers, still in stealth.
Airbnb — Not an insurance company but their offer short term insurance for renters through Lloyd’s of London, however there is some controversy around the policy they offer.
Home Insurance
Quilt — Next-gen home insurance, still in stealth.
Super — Raised 3.6M, Next-gen home insurance for home services, appliances, or your entire home.
P2P
Lemonade — Raised $13M, P2P insurance company, still in stealth.
Gather — Building a P2P insurance model for SMB insurance.
Friendsurance — Raised $15M, P2P insurance, based in Berlin.
Guevara — P2P auto insurance, currently up and running offering P2P car insurance (Thanks Roland Cassirer for pointing that out)
Inspool — P2P auto insurance, not launched yet.
Jointly — P2P auto insurance, not launched yet.
BoughtByMany — P2P health insurance.
WorldCover — Was part of YC, building a P2P insurance product for crop insurance in emerging economies.
Product Insurance
Trov — On demand insurance for individual products. Creating a new type of insurance.
Jetty — raised $4M, next-gen property and casualty insurance. Not launched yet.
Cover — Part of YCombinator, offers product insurance (phones, pet, jewelry, etc) all through taking a picture on your phone.
SimpleSurance — Raised $11.5M, provides product insurance (electronics, bikes, appliances etc) — based in Berlin.
Asurion — Not a startup, but Asurion dominates the $7.8B protection plan market for cell phones.
China
I wanted to keep this market map mainly U.S. focused but there is an insurance company in China — Zhong An — which we can learn a lot from.
Zhong An — raised $934M dollars in funding and was jointly launched by Alibaba, Tencent, and the insurance company — Ping An. Zhong An operates a pure 100% online full stack carrier which offers 100 different insurance products from health, auto, travel, etc.
They are the only major player in the China insurance space and is the first and only company in China to obtain an Internet insurance license (I believe this is still the case)
In 2015 they wrote $3.6B in policies across 369M customers. They are planning to IPO in 2016.
I hope this landscape sparks a conversation and if you have any feedback feel free to tweet @mccannatron or email me — especially if you feel I am missing any other categories of companies. I’m still learning about the space so would welcome any feedback. I’m also happy to connect with anyone working on a new insurance company — feel free to reach out anytime.

Insurance and Feelings
Aetna is the worst thing I have to worry about.
My desk.
Last week, I learned that Aetna doesn’t fully cover the costs of my therapy, not even half of it really, as Anthem did at my previous employer. Last week, Dawn, one of my excellent coworkers in HR, emailed Aetna on my behalf. Last week, we got a response that I didn’t really like from Aetna. Last week I was, briefly, really annoyed and unhappy with something to do with my job.
In that moment, in the middle of my unhappiness, I smiled as wide as my cheeks would allow at the situation. It struck me that in the 3.5 months I’d been at Slack, this was the first time I’d ever had any reason to be unhappy about something there.
People have asked me what the culture is like, how I feel about it, if I’m happier, and I’ve kept telling them that I’m going to write about it at some point, one day I’ll say how I’m feeling. Until last week, I didn’t have anything concrete to point to, nothing that I thought was enough to properly illustrate how I feel.
#earth-tones
It wouldn’t have been enough to try to describe the elation I felt when I walked in on my first day and immediately felt like I wasn’t alone because there were three other black women in technical roles already there. It wouldn’t have been enough to say that though I was in a new role, using new tools, my coworkers gave me the space and time to learn, letting me get up to speed so I could confidently contribute meaningful stuff. It wouldn’t have been enough to mention the Slack channel dedicated to helping people handle difficult feelings, that is full of warmth, kindness and space to let people have those feelings without being made to feel shameful about them. It wouldn’t have been enough to say that everybody is empathetic and kind to a degree that makes me feel kind like I need to step my humaning skills up just to be on their levels. It wouldn’t have been enough to say that I have never felt more valued and included or less different and isolated anywhere in my life. Those things, while true and meaningful, wouldn’t have been enough to accurately reflect what the past 3.5 months have been like.
Last week, the feeling I got in knowing that the only bit of real unhappiness I’ve had at Slack was to do with insurance, perhaps the most mundane, uninteresting, and unworthy of discussion topic in the history of the world, was complete amusement, and that’s when I knew I couldn’t put off sharing anymore. The world, especially women and/or people of color in tech, had to know that there exists at least one place where the biggest and most pressing source of workplace unhappiness is insurance fuckery.
…even in the rough bits, I still feel like I’m ok to be myself. I still feel like I’m part of the team. I still don’t feel like I’m different. I still feel like I belong.
It hasn’t been all rainbows and sunshine, mind you. There are things that I think could be better. There are no women or people of color on the Slack board and, as far as I can tell, we don’t have any people of color in management, things I feel strongly about. There have been days when I’ve gone into the bathroom to have a quiet moment because I was frustrated with the slow progress I’d been making. Feeling like I’m not contributing doesn’t sit well with me, and learning a slew of new things on top of starting a new role has made contributing difficult. On days when yet another picture of a black body is being shared around the internet, attached to yet another hashtag, I still go hide in the library or an alcove so I can process the emotions I’m feeling. But the thing is, even in those times, even in the rough bits, I still feel like I’m ok to be myself. I still feel like I’m part of the team. I still don’t feel like I’m different. I still feel like I belong.
We’re all in this together.
Stewart has many catch phrases. I won’t rattle them off here because I wouldn’t be able to do them justice, and I’m not really clear on what being the dog means anyway. One though, is pretty demonstrative of what I think makes Slack feel good to me: “We’re all in this together.”
That not-completely-covered-by-Aetna therapy I go to once a week helped me understand myself a lot better, and more importantly, how I tick and what makes me feel happiest: safety and security. My life hasn’t been filled with safety or security, and definitely not both at the same time. Moments when I’ve felt safest and life felt most ok usually preceded really bad times. Maybe this is just Life. At any rate, usually, when I’m happy, part of me is bracing for impact, waiting for the other shoe to drop, for the bad thing to happen so I can deal with it. I don’t feel that at Slack, not even a little bit.
I feel Safe at Slack. Capital S.
I feel Safe at Slack. Capital S. No need to brace for the bad. I don’t worry about any incoming surprises, because I just don’t think they’re coming here. This stems from the “we’re all in this together”-ness that is part of the ethos. Everyone is willing to help everyone. I mean, sure, ask a question, get an answer is pretty standard in most places, but at Slack, you ask the question and the answer doesn’t come with any ego or annoyance. People just help and are happy to, often without your asking for it.
I was recently working on a thing that could have held up my progress and without my even asking for it, my manager asked me if I needed a hand with it. Honestly, I was taken aback at first. Was this his way of telling me I needed to get a move on? Did some plan change that I wasn’t aware of? Turns out neither, he just knew I was at a sticky part and wanted to lend a hand. It’s that sort of thing, not just being a good manager, or teammate, but a good person.
Slack’s Diversity data. Not pictured: Slack’s inclusivity data, which isn’t so easy to capture.
I talk a lot about diversity, but I’m learning that without an environment that encourages being good humans, without leadership that champions empathy, kindness, communication, and compassion, all diversity efforts are for naught. Hire all the “heads of diversity” you want, dump as much money into as many pipeline improvement non-profits as your bank account will allow, but at the end of the day, if you haven’t cultivated a culture that everyone feels welcome and included in, where nobody goes to work wondering which of their coworkers thinks they are lesser than because of their skin color or gender or sexual orientation, where everyone is human first and treats their coworkers that way, your company will see little, if any improvement in those diversity charts, because people can and will leave.
If a company has accepted the importance of a diverse environment, it’s imperative that they also accept that inclusivity is equally important.
This isn’t to minimize the importance of diversity. I’m certain members of a completely homogenous environment could feel very welcomed and included in that space. However, if a company has accepted the importance of a diverse environment, it’s imperative that they also accept that inclusivity is equally important, and inclusivity requires that everyone pay close attention to being good humans to each other. To be sure, though Slack is relatively diverse in comparison to many other Silicon Valley companies, I would not be interested in staying if I didn’t feel like I was in a healthy environment, working with good people.
There’s a lot more to say, but I think that’s really the crux of it: I work with a lot of really good people. Kind, empathetic, helpful people, who are trying their best to be good at humaning, every single day, and believe the effort is worth it. People who will offer to deal with insurance nonsense with me. People who ask each other how they’re feeling each day, and genuinely want to know the answers. People who care as much about each other as they do about the product they’re working on. People who inspire me to be better at my job. People who inspire me to be a better human. I’m grateful for that, I’m grateful for them, I’m grateful that a year ago life kicked me in the ass enough to make the changes I needed to make to be happy…and I am.
Finally.
Erica is human who is also pretty happy outside of work, remains peeved about Aetna’s bullshit, and continues to feel weird about writing about herself in the third person. So weird.
Many thanks to B for proofreading and also for making excellent scrambled eggs.

Paul Ryan admitted he has no idea how health insurance works
Ladies and gentlemen, meet the conservative movement’s Great Wonk.
CREDIT: AP Photo/J. Scott Applewhite
Speaker Paul Ryan (R-WI), the Great and Knowledgeable Policy Wonk and Wise Knower of Many Things About Health Care, has no idea how insurance works.
The Great Wonk’s poor grasp of one of the most basic financial instruments was clear after a Power Point presentation he gave Thursday advocating for the House GOP’s embattled health care bill.

The problem with Obamacare, Ryan claimed in this presentation, is that “the young healthy person is going to be made to buy health care and they’re going to pay for the person who gets breast cancer in her 40s or heart disease in their 50s.” He then pointed to a pie chart showing a thin red slice cut into a larger blue pie.
The red slice here are what I would call people with preexisting conditions. People who have real health-care problems. The blue is the rest of the people in the individual market — that’s the market where people don’t get health insurance at their jobs where they buy it themselves. The whole idea of Obamacare is the people on the blue side pay for the people on the red side. The people who are healthy pay for the people who are sick.
Well, yes, that is the whole idea of Obamacare. It’s also the whole idea of any form of insurance of any kind whatsoever.
Think of it this way. Imagine that 1,000 people all buy the same car insurance policy. Over the course of the year, ten of them get in car accidents that cost $10,000 each.
If none of them were insured, the ten unlucky drivers would each be stuck with a $10,000 bill, while the other 990 drivers would pay nothing. The entire point of insurance, however, is to spread this cost around to everyone in the insurance pool. So each driver would instead pay at least $100 in premiums, regardless of whether they were in an accident, and then this money would be redistributed to the ten unlucky individuals with high auto repair bills.
All insurance works this way. Car insurance redistributes wealth from people who aren’t in accidents to people who are. Fire insurance redistributes wealth from people whose houses did not burn down to people whose houses did burn down. Flood insurance redistributes wealth from people who are dry to people whose belongings are soaking wet. And yes, health insurance redistributes wealth from people who are healthy to people who are sick.
The most overrated intellect in Washington
thinkprogress.org
After attacking Obamacare for doing the thing that all insurance, by its very nature, will do, Ryan proposed an alternative to traditional insurance — high-risk pools.
The idea behind high-risk pools is to create a special government program that pays for the most expensive health consumers’ health costs, while leaving other, healthier patients to buy insurance in the private market. That way, healthy individuals still pay for the health care of sick individuals, but they pay for them in higher taxes rather than in higher insurance premiums.
Theoretically, this is a viable policy, but it requires a considerable investment. In 2008, for example, Republican presidential candidate John McCain proposed spending $7 to $10 billion on high-risk pools (the House GOP’s health bill similarly calls for about $10 billion in annual spending on high-risk pools). But this was hardly enough to put a dent in the nation’s uninsurance problem.
As ThinkProgress has previously reported:
A national program “funded at $7 billion per year would cover only 875,000 people,” and that was in 2008. Alternatively, “even if participants had to pay half of their own premiums, as is generally the case today in state high risk pools, less than 2 million Americans would be covered.”
Obamacare, meanwhile, provides health insurance to about 20 million Americans.

What Cancer Can Cost (Even With Insurance)
Our expenses, as heavy as they were, represent a best-case scenario for the costs of cancer.
Photo credit: r. nial bradshaw, CC BY 2.0.
Money was one thing I didn’t worry about when my husband Brad, now 46, asked me if he should get a doctor to check out the weird lumps on his jaw. Don’t get me wrong; I was scared. Those lumps, plus his dramatic weight loss and weird night sweats, sounded to both me and Dr. Google like cancer. But we were financially secure, with savings and good insurance through his job as a university professor. My fears centered on the emotional costs of cancer: the strain on our family, how to tell our two young daughters, the possibility of widowhood.
I was naive about not just how grueling his cancer treatment would be (short answer: very), but also how expensive. Brad’s diagnosis of a rare T-cell lymphoma came in February 2015. The rest of the year was a roller coaster of second opinions, hospitalization, chemotherapy, and relapse. The latter left him only one option: a stem cell transplant (a risky procedure formerly known as a bone marrow transplant), which he underwent in January 2016. His hospital bills skyrocketed into the millions, but insurance covered those; we even had a special liaison at our insurance company who fought for extra coverage for Brad. Our out-of-pocket costs last year were small compared to the bills, but nevertheless mounted into the tens of thousands.
The costs climbed so high because the stem cell transplant saved Brad’s life but nearly killed him first. He came home from the hospital in May blind, immune suppressed, on IV medications, and debilitated from four months in bed. His doctors said he needed someone with him 24 hours a day, and with two children who have to go places, like school, I couldn’t be that person. Insurance won’t cover in-home attendants (though it did cover brief nurse visits for once-a-week skilled tasks like blood draws), so we paid home health attendants for more than two months, until Brad could safely navigate stairs or take a shower unattended. The total cost was $21,807.50.
When Brad left the hospital, the pharmacist handed over a grocery sack of more than 30 medications and a bewildering spreadsheet guide to administering them. Over the year, prescription copays cost $2,013.06. Copays for doctor and dentist visits (including our whole family) came to to $3,146.10. Our monthly insurance premiums were $252.11. (His employer pays much more: $1,727 per month for health insurance alone.)
In the fall, a new cancer interrupted Brad’s recovery. The powerful immune suppressants he took post-transplant caused a different aggressive lymphoma. His oncologist recommended treatment at a clinical trial in New York; we live in California. We bought flights last-minute, in December, and Brad had to stay near a hospital on the Upper East Side, an area where lodging isn’t exactly a bargain. Travel and lodging cost another $9,798.74.
We also incurred miscellaneous expenses like retrofitting our bathroom to accommodate his handicaps ($336), special nutritional supplements ($92 per case, several times), and parking at the hospital ($99 per month). All told, our out-of-pocket medical expenses in 2016 added up to $43,565.82 — more than my annual salary in any of my first three professional jobs. That figure leaves out indirect costs: hiring extra babysitters, helping pay for lodging for his parents (who came from Canada to help), and grocery delivery and laundry service because I was so overextended.
Recently, some friends have asked with concern how the hell we are managing. Brad is a professor, and I am a freelance writer, though I haven’t had time to work much in the past two years. We do have a hidden income source: some family investments I inherited after my mother’s death. Brad’s benefits are generous, and he has received his full pay (his annual salary is $80,000) for nearly two years, thanks to a great deal of accrued sick leave and catastrophic leave donations from his colleagues.
Now, however, he has run out of leave, and he is still too ill to return to work. His university offers early disability retirement with a modest pension, which allows him to retain our health insurance. He also now receives Social Security disability benefits ($1,813 per month), and our daughters receive a child benefit ($453 per month, per child).
Our expenses, as heavy as they were, represent a best-case scenario for the costs of cancer. We got off easy — and so did our insurer. Brad’s hospital bills in 2016 totaled more than $7 million; the first explanation of benefits (EOB) I opened, one exhausted day when I came home from the hospital, was for $3,922,498.67. (A significant chunk of that was labeled “room and board;” since my husband’s condition rendered him unable to eat for months, I felt like he should have gotten a discount on the board.) Other EOBs rolled in, sporting figures like $787,929.61; $1,085,933.82; and $1,091,127.76. Last year we received 209 EOBs — more than one every other day.
Our share of all those billed costs for my husband’s four-month-long hospitalization was a cool $0. Of course, our insurer paid only a fraction of those figures. Negotiated discount rates for big carriers shift high costs onto the uninsured and marginally insured, bankrupting them in droves. Had we not had insurance, all those bills would have come straight to us, and even liquidating all our assets would not have begun to cover them.
Before the stem cell transplant, I feared that the costs Brad had already incurred might put him close to a lifetime limit on coverage. I frantically pored over our insurance policy, wondering if we should be equally frantically saving more. Like many Americans, I was at the time unaware that the Affordable Care Act — now under threat of repeal — had banned such coverage caps, as one of the protections it extended to people with employer-provided insurance plans. Before the ACA’s passage, close to 60 percent of such plans had coverage caps — many as low as $2 million in lifetime costs. Imagine having a premature baby who exceeds her lifetime-coverage quota before ever leaving the NICU, or undergoing grueling cancer treatment for years and surviving, only to be denied coverage when the insurer has spent what it deems enough.
Politicians aiming to repeal the ACA speak of personal responsibility, saying Americans should save more for health-care costs. But personal responsibility alone is insufficient for such devastating diseases as cancer. The idea that most Americans could fund a health savings account — as suggested by those who would repeal the ACA — enough to cover even a minor medical emergency, let alone an ongoing health crisis or chronic illness, is cruelly nonsensical.
Out-of-pocket costs gave my husband’s and my personal responsibility an expensive workout in 2016. We are extraordinarily fortunate that we could sort of afford it. We felt the pinch but kept our house, and — unlike some of our friends who have endured cancer treatment — we didn’t have to declare bankruptcy. Unlike many whom ACA repeal threatens, we can keep our insurance, and for that we are thankful. Brad is currently in remission, recovering slowly at home from his long ordeal, and our expenses so far this year are lighter. But if we’ve learned anything from my husband’s long illness, it is that cancer is unpredictable — and so are medical expenses.
Kate Washington, a writer in Northern California, is at work on a book about caregiving, cancer, and literature. Follow her on Twitter: @washingtonkate

This Insurance Startup Wants to Cover Tomorrow’s Self-Driving Cars
For now, penny-pinching Tesla owners will get a discount when they use Autopilot.
(mbbirdy / istockphoto)

When Joshua Brown drove his Tesla last May into a truck making a turn — or, depending on how you view it, when the Tesla drove itself into a truck while Joshua Brown was behind the wheel — the fatal accident triggered a crisis for Elon Musk’s electric car company. Was its hands-off Autopilot feature, despite caveats that a driver’s hands should be ready to grab control in a split second, inherently unsafe? Did its auto-braking system fail? The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) launched a seven-month investigation. Early this year, it concluded: “A safety-related defect trend has not been identified at this time and further examination of this issue does not appear to be warranted.” Though the agency cautioned that its investigation did not preclude the possibility that the system has a safety-related defect, Tesla felt vindicated.
Now an auto insurance startup called Root is taking that conclusion to the bank, so to speak. It believes that the investigation, as well as its own studies on the matter, make a strong case that Teslas with Autopilot are safer than just plain humans. So confident is Root about this that, starting today, it is charging Tesla drivers lower fees if they turn on and use the controversial Autopilot feature.
Follow Backchannel: Facebook | Twitter
“When we believe that a car is in autonomous mode, we apply a discount to those miles,” says Root CEO Alex Timm. “It’s a pretty significant amount of premium — a little above 10 percent for now.” The discounts get higher as the percentage of highway miles driven increases.
Some people might find this discount surprising considering recent reports (including one we ran on Backchannel just last week) that Autopilot is somewhat of a work in progress. But Timm agrees with Tesla that the driving-assist system, even as Tesla keeps improving it, is superior to a plain old human driving the vehicle. “We believe that these cars are definitively safer,” says Timm.
Root was particularly impressed at the NHTSA report’s finding that after Tesla drivers installed Autosteer, a key component of the Autopilot systems, the crash rate dropped by almost 40 percent. “That really got our attention, so we started to look into it,” says Timm. Root tested the cars, and bought one itself. And now Root is exercising its actuarial mojo by betting that it will pay out fewer dollars in claims to Telsa owners who turn over some of their duties to Elon Musk’s software.

The Tesla discount is a natural outgrowth of Root’s business model, which is based on using technology to identify safe drivers and offer them low rates. If you suck at driving, you don’t get a policy. Before getting coverage, customers must submit to a two-to-three-week testing period, downloading the Root app to their phones, which will use the sensors in the device to track location, speed, acceleration, and whether they are weaving recklessly between lanes at 2 a.m. after leaving a taproom. Or whether they are using the actual phone measuring their driving skills to text while in motion. This actually happens, says Timm, because after a few days drivers forget that they are being monitored and revert to bad habits.
(c/o Root)
According to Timm, about 70 percent of those who undergo this process will be deemed safe drivers, whereupon the company will offer them a low rate, with the entire transaction done on the phone. (Even your proof-of-insurance card will be stored on the device.) The other 30 percent have to get insurance from Root’s competitors. No matter how miserable a driver you are, Root will not report you to the authorities, though if it’s clear you pose a menace, the company will send a gentle email broaching the subject. Timm says it goes something along the lines of, “Things aren’t looking so well…You really should rethink some of these things.” Those emails aren’t always well received. “A lot of people don’t want to be coached at all on their driving behavior, because everybody thinks they’re a good driver.”
That mentality used to be a big problem for auto insurers. But we are at the cusp of an era in which everybody’s record will become pristine, because when all cars drive themselves, everyone will be a superb driver. One might think this will be a boon for insurers, who will see claims drop dramatically. Timm argues otherwise: The paucity of accidents and claims will drop the real cost of insurance so low that the established companies, stuck with high overheads, won’t be able to cut their prices enough. They will thus be subject to Uber-level disruption from newcomers who will be able to charge fees as low as $30 every six months.
Root views itself as one of those newcomers, a “next-gen” insurer that will take advantage of this paradigm shift. Timm himself is kind of an insurance nerd who began in the business at age 14. “Let’s say I was not a normal kid,” he admits. Now 28, he started Root in 2014 after working as an actuary for Nationwide. Last October, Root began selling policies; Timm won’t divulge figures but reports steady growth. Eventually, he hopes to topple his former employer and its fellow dinosaurs as the very essence of auto insurance changes.
“Those other carriers will have a significant problem because they’re not set up to understand the data,” he says. “And their expense structures will start to crush them.”

Root has not contacted Tesla directly, but says that even without the car manufacturer’s help, the Root app can figure out when a Tesla owner is using Autopilot. Timm hopes that in the future, the company can work directly with Tesla to get better data. That may well happen. Though Tesla would not put an executive on the record to talk about the the issue, it gave a statement saying that it “will consider how it can best ensure that insurance agencies understand the safety benefits to customers from using Autopilot.” In an earnings call recently, Musk indicated he’s open to sharing aggregate data with government agencies and other manufacturers. Presumably, he’d have no problem if owners voluntarily opted in to sharing their personal driving data, in order to get lower rates.
All of that data sharing, of course, opens up a lot of privacy issues. Root says that it doesn’t track drivers once they clear the bar for coverage. But he does believe that ultimately every auto insurance company will want to measure a driver’s performance before insuring him or her. And who’s to say that eventually the standard won’t be moved to constant, real-time monitoring?
(c/o Root)
In any case, Root’s announcement is a high-profile way to grab the lead in the as-yet-undeclared competition to insure drivers who aren’t driving. Of course, the actuary in Alex Timm understands that there’s some risk involved. Though Timm is a huge fan of Tesla’s Autopilot feature — “When you experience it you absolutely know it’s the future,” he says — he has also lived through that Autopilot moment when you think, Uh-oh, it’s time to grab the wheel. He admits that gave him pause. But ultimately he concluded that “it takes a bit more risk to be a bit more forward-thinking.” And he feels confident that Tesla has managed the risk in a way that makes the cars safer.
Of course, by rolling out its self-driving discount at this early stage of its business, Root itself is managing risk. Though the company is in the process of getting licensed in 12 new states, it currently covers customers only in its home state of Ohio. How many Teslas owners can there possibly be in Ohio?
The only one I’ve heard of is the late Joshua Brown. Though the 40-year-old Tesla driver met his fate on a Florida road, he was registered in Canton.

Tesla Drivers Are Paying Big Bucks to Test Flawed Self-Driving Software
Owners of newer Tesla models are driving cars with imperfect code, risking accidents.backchannel.com

The Secret Behind Lemonade’s Instant Insurance
Introducing AI Jim, the Lemonade claims bot
Hey everyone. It’s been almost a month since my last update where we exposed the metrics from Lemonade’s first 48 hours. Today, I wanted to let you in on some of the secret stuff that drives our unique claims experience.
I couldn’t have asked for a better setting for writing this post — here in this gorgeous countryside village, on the outskirts of Lisbon, where once a year, a bunch of techies get together for a few days of talk about Artificial Intelligence, Virtual Reality, Healthcare and Autonomous Everything. Big things are coming, and I’m super excited to see Lemonade a part of it.
Enjoying Mixed Reality with Robert Scoble and Paddy Cosgrave
Alright, I could go on about this forever, but we have things to discuss.
A well hidden secret
When we started mapping everything that we thought was broken in the old insurance world, one thing kept coming up: just how poor the claims experience was. People told us they sometimes had to wait months before having their claims paid, not to mention the hassle and paperwork involved.
There are many reasons why insurance companies find it difficult to provide a good claims service. First, insurance companies are run by people, tens of thousands of them, doing manual labor, filling out forms, faxing stuff and calling phones. These operations take time. Just think about those claims piling up on someone’s desk…
But there’s another, less obvious reason. One that insurance companies feel bad admitting even exists.
The secret insurance companies don’t want us to know: the less they pay out for claims, the richer they become.
You see, that guy who’s responsible for your claim could be an honest fella. I bet he is. But it doesn’t matter because the system he works for is designed to maximize profits, so he and his coworkers are under constant pressure to cut costs and meet their targets. But in the claims world, cutting costs often means paying you less, or not at all.
This was our Aha! moment. If we could figure out how to take away the underlying incentives that drive insurance companies to behave the way they do, we’d have a shot at profoundly changing how insurance works.
We realized that to build a system that is clean from bureaucracy, manual processes and distrust, we would have to remove the temptation of maximizing profits by never keeping unclaimed premiums to ourselves.
Instead of feeding from premium leftovers, we only take a 20% flat fee off the top. The rest goes to stuff like reinsurance, surplus, taxes, claims and our famous Giveback. This way, regardless of the amount we pay out in claims, we end up with the same bottom line.
This changes everything.
Now, there’s no more pressure to hold back on payments, and no incentives that work against our customers. Check out what Jim, who leads claims at Lemonade, wrote about how we’re revolutionizing the way claims are handled.
Btw, if you’re asking yourself — what happens when money runs out, it’s the same as in any other insurance company. We’re reinsured by the biggest names in the industry, including Lloyd’s.
This is something (the real) Jim wrote on our office window, to remind himself of our unconventional values
So we no longer treat our users’ leftover premium money as our potential revenue because we give it back anyway. And because it’s not ours and we’re giving it back — we can delight our customers by doing everything painfully simple and super fast.
We designed Lemonade to be instant. Buying a policy, filing a claim or switching from a previous insurer shouldn’t take more than seconds.
Self-Served Claims
The part of our product that got the most attention was the claims system. After looking at commercial insurance software it was clear that we needed something completely different.
Put simple, we needed a bot version of Jim, so our customers could enjoy his charming personality and kickass claims handling, 24/7 365.
Chatting with AI Jim while filing a claim in the Lemonade app
Our team spent months learning how claims are handled by humans in old insurance companies. We then used this knowledge to craft an instant claims experience for our claims bot — AI Jim. The algorithms powering AI Jim ‘understand’ the nature of claims, their severity, and whether the user is in a state of emergency. AI Jim also tries to assess the likelihood of a claim being fraudulent and even nudges people to be more honest by incorporating years of behavioral economics research into every little detail in the conversation and the UI.
Jim’s AI tracks loads of user-generated data-points to help us identify suspicious activity and predict what our customers need before they even know it. In the first month or so, our system tracked 3.7 million signals.
But as we often experience from the likes of Siri, as smart as algorithms may be, they aren’t always perfect. This is why we only use our claim algorithms to help us reach one single decision: should a claim be handled automatically or not. AI Jim will either pay claims instantly or call in the human Jim to take charge.

Setting expectations
Having AI and a good infrastructure doesn’t mean that we’ll blindly and automatically pay every claim we get. Insurance is a regulated business, and even if we wanted to, paying every claim will put us and our reinsurers out of business quickly.
So, setting expectations is very important, and is something we’ll be working on improving constantly. Our policy forms are still based on the regulatory approved format, and they’re lame, we know ;)
Here’s an example of a claim we will not cover: Our policy clearly states that there are certain breeds of dogs that will not be covered if they attack someone and that someone gets injured. If a person ignores this and his Pitbull Terrier (one of the non-covered vicious dogs) bites Newman the Mailman, we will not be able to help.
It’s still too early to share stats about our claims activity (there isn’t much to share), but I promise to do so as we continue to gather interesting insight about damages, claims and everything that’s in between.
In the meantime, stay safe and check out Lemonade.com

Risk & Reward: Opportunities in Insurance
We take it for granted, but insurance is an incredible financial instrument for consumers and businesses: give a small and steady stream of payments today to avoid getting stuck with catastrophic payment(s) in the future. Whether medical, automotive, life, residential, or commercial, the value proposition of smoothing out potential cash flow outlays often makes sense. Pretty cool. But on any chart highlighting relative customer satisfaction across industries, you will consistently find that insurance ranks among the last — only ahead of real estate, telcos and cable companies.
Source: Satisfaction Survey — BCG / Morgan Stanley: “Insurance Technology Evolution and Revolution”
At a time when nearly every product category has been reimagined by a higher quality digital successor — the insurance industry and customer have been left in the dust. But the amount of chatter and activity surrounding insurance in the venture world is growing. This is great news for consumers and businesses, and troubling for flat-flooted incumbents. To highlight just a few interesting signals from the market:
Insurance firms with corporate venture arms are signaling need for innovation within their model. Axa, Assurant, Munich Re, and AmFam are just a few examples of firms opting to learn and participate in the disruption as opposed to sitting on the sidelines.
We now have a few proof points in the industry. Instead of delivering software tools and analytics to enhance the legacy value chain, businesses like GC-backed Oscar and SF startup Clover Health have decided to wipe the slate clean and start fresh. The industry is that broken.
Friends at other venture firms are talking about the emerging opportunities. Brendan Dickinson at Canaan drew parallels to the explosion in recent non-bank lending investing activity and the opportunity to overcome what previously seemed like insurmountable regulatory barriers. Frank Chen at Andreessen highlighted new applications for software across the value chain — from pricing risk to engaging customers and pooling capital. And Lee Hower of NextView ventures called out the startling innovation gap between most developed countries (where 40–50% of insurance is bought or managed over the internet) versus the U.S. (with less than 5% online).
Venture money is now going into the industry, where it used to be barren. Aggregate VC funding in insurance over the past 5 years tops $2B, but was already at ~$800M in just the first half of 2015 alone.
VC Financing Trends in Insurance (2010–2015YTD)
SO, WHAT GIVES?
The venture world is always in search for the next big market opportunity, of which insurance is certainly one. Insurance represents more than $1.3T in premiums in the U.S. alone. That’s bigger than the the amount of money spent annually on online travel (~$160B) + household work (~$460B) + food delivery (~$600B) — combined.
The industry is also really old. There are 46 insurance companies in the Fortune 500, with an average age of around 95 years. We’re talking pre-internet, and it shows. The industry’s entire organizational structure was designed for an antiquated, Mad Men era buying experience.
And, these incumbents are pervasive. Collectively, insurance companies employ more than 2m people and spend billions of dollars annually on marketing. You can’t watch an hour of television without getting interrupted by a little lizard, caveman in tennis whites, or quacking duck. It’s everywhere.

But the customer experience with these companies — whether in life, home/renters, or commercial — has largely stayed the same. Insurance has been insulated from the disruption impacting other sectors like travel, due to complex regulatory requirements, inherent channel conflict between carriers & brokers, and the opaque nature of data used to assess risk. Like so many other industries, it’s time to move on — and to accept the opportunities, unknowns, and challenges that come with a scaled digital population.
WHY NOW?
Timing is everything and the industry is finally on the brink of transformative change, driven by strong secular trends. The world is online and connected — creating new distribution channels but also new risk (e.g., cybersecurity). Additionally, explosion of the shared economy and 1099 workers has created fractional ownership — and with it, uncertainty around who bears the risk.
And in that digital world, we generate digital exhaust, which can be used to better personalize policies and underwrite risk. Increasingly, consumers are wearing FitBits to track wellness data, installing Canary for home security, or sharing lifestyle behavior on social media. Imagine tracking your driving data in real-time, making dynamic changes to policy premiums, and receiving an instant claim reimbursement for that fender bender — all with just a few taps on your mobile phone.
Crucially, the regulatory climate is also changing. Historically, success has required huge capital reserves as well as navigating 50 state-by-state regulators with unique laws around underwriting, pricing and distribution. This structure has stalled innovation, protected incumbents and imposed tremendous costs. Now, Washington is beginning to call for more simple and consistent requirements across state and federal levels. Emerging structures have the potential to lower capital reserve hurdles or change the way capital is pooled. And the U.S. insurance industry is facing increasing pressure to adopt international regulatory standards that encourage consumer protection and price transparency. All of these policies should lower barriers to entry, level the playing field and create opportunities for new entrants to innovate.
The world is changing. If you look at Oscar, SoFi, Lending Club, these are categories of financial services that nobody thought would be reinvented by a startup. But we live in a post-2008 financial crisis, JOBS act, and peer-to-peer lending world. Now, more than ever before, entrepreneurs are ready and able to take on the Mega Fortune 500 companies.
WHAT’S NEXT?
Despite the complexity of products, the insurance business model is rather simple, relying on policy premium income and asset management. I’m focused here on the operating side of insurance, and see opportunities for innovation across the value chain. Importantly, while each step of the value chain is consistent across the industry (as outlined below), the ability to fundamentally change process and drive margin will vary wildly by insurance vertical (e.g., life, auto, health).

I’m focused on 3 investment theses that I’ll dig into deeper in subsequent posts.
Online Aggregators & Brokers. The first mirrors GC’s experience with Kayak and trying to bring best of breed user experience to online aggregation / shopping. Through smart user experience, information transparency, and digital concierge-like services — it’s possible to make informed decisions (that once seemed so complicated they required a human) and fully transact online. Success of companies like Check24 in Germany highlight how far behind the U.S. is, and underscore the size of the opportunity.
New Direct to Consumer Brands. The second leverages GC’s experience building DTC brands, such as Warby Parker and Oscar. Fully digital players in Homeowners/Renters and Life Insurance will increasingly displace existing carriers, by re-positioning products and engaging consumers directly.
New Models. I’ll challenge some of the fundamental assumptions we’ve made about types of products that require coverage and how business models are structured. Drawing from experience with transformative models like Digit, FundBox, and RealtyShares, I’ll explore models like peer-to-peer (e.g., Guevara) and pay-as-you-go (e.g., MetroMile) that are more nimble and flexible.
It has been exciting to see the energy that’s being poured into the insurance sector from engineers, data scientists, and early stage investors. GC has been active in the space for a couple of years, leading early investments in Oscar (health insurance), Censio (driver analytics for improved underwriting), and Super (home warrantee). As I look at GC’s work with next generation DTC brands (Warby Parker, Honest Co) and disruptive financial services (FundBox, Stripe, RealtyShares), I’m confident that entrepreneurs can deliver new levels of service and transparency in insurance. I’m excited to make a number of more bets in the category — and even more excited for the value to be unlocked in the ecosystem.
Thanks to Whitney Arthofer, Prateek Alsi, and Molly Gillis for your help exploring this space and with this post.
Disclaimer: The comments and views above are my own and are not intended to be construed as investment advice.

Andres Franzetti
Insurance, The Blockchain, and The Sharing Economy:
Re-Imagining InsurTech with P2P Social Insurance Networks on the Blockchain
I never thought I would ever write a paper about Insurance, but it recently came up as an interest of mine, as I’ve found that the most interested, and interesting parties, in the blockchain ecosystem are the innovators in the Insurance industry. This is my take, musing if you will, on how Insurance companies can easily approach innovating in their industry with some exceptionally smart founders who are very willing to collaborate with the industry titans to solve some of the most interesting problems facing the developed and developing world.
This article will explore how individuals, entrepreneurs, and insurance companies can come together to create new and innovative insurance models to drive customer adoption and satisfaction, as well as address the needs of the underinsured and uninsured in the developed and developing world through Blockchain enabled Peer-to-Peer transactional social insurance networks.
I will investigate new ways of looking at insurance, risk, and social networks, as well as how the blockchain, prediction markets, decentralized autonomous organizations, and smart contracts can fundamentally unlock the commercial scale and social power of “the sharing economy” to exponentially drive innovation in the insurance industry.
— — — — —
We all want to help one another. Human beings are like that. We want to live by each other’s happiness — not by each other’s misery. We don’t want to hate and despise one another. In this world there is room for everyone. And the good earth is rich and can provide for everyone. The way of life can be free and beautiful, but we have lost the way
— Charlie Chaplin, the Great Dictator
Insurance Origins
“Friendly Societies” or “Collaborative Communities” was the original model of the insurance business. However, the modern problems associated with the insurance business can be somewhat attributed to corporate centralization, state controls, and constrictive policy decisions.
Essentially, the development of the modern business of insurance started, and is largely dependant on a “hedge” or bet against risks, especially regarding cargo, property, death, automobile accidents, and medical treatment, which can be attributed, historically, to “Mutuals” which were formed by firefighters, farmers and other groups to share in their losses and gains. The early peer to peer nature of industry helped to eliminate risk, and spread said risk from the individual to the larger community. This provided an important source of long-term finance for both the public and private sectors. [01]
Before the development of large-scale government, employer health insurance programs, and other financial services, friendly societies played an important part in many people’s lives. Many of these societies still exist. In some countries, some of them developed into large mutually run financial institutions, typically insurance companies, and lost any social and ceremonial aspect they may have had; in others incarnations, they continue to have a role based on solidarity and democracy without an objective to make profit.
Take for example the early cases of medical insurance, especially in America, members typically paid regular membership fees and went to lodge meetings to take part in ceremonies. If members became sick, they would receive an allowance to help them meet their financial obligations. Typically in member/friendly societies, members of the group would visit sick peers to give emotional and other support, and possibly to verify that the sick member was not malingering, “Malingering” is fabricating or exaggerating the symptoms of mental or physical disorders for a variety of “secondary gain” motives, which may include financial compensation (often tied to fraud)[02].
Eventually, The shift away from the decentralized nature of insurance — to a system of paying for a company to take on that risk — had resulted in expensive premiums, fraud, incomplete information on policyholders, and the moral hazards of coverage.
I would propose that by going back to the roots of insurance, coupled with a few modern technology networks and protocols namely; the internet, social networks and the blockchain, We can provide an new approach to an old world system that will mitigate risks, reduce costs, and ultimately provide better service to a broader range of people worldwide. The peer group, enabled by the internet, social networks, and the blockchain can self insure to a point and partner with either an insurance carrier or reinsurance organization to deal with almost any type of insurance from the simple protection of valuables to really catastrophic and unexpected losses.
The Sharing Economy
It can be argued that the most valuable companies, and fastest growing of recent time, can be attributed to a group of startups that primarily focused on monetizing unused or underused inventory leveraged through online networks. By creating a marketplace and the ability to discover these unseen “assets” companies like AirBnB, Lyft, and Uber have dramatically reshaped the landscapes of their respective industries, creating a new category called the “Sharing Economy”.
The Sharing economy refers to peer-to-peer-based sharing of access to goods and services (coordinated through community-based online services).[1] Sharing economy can take a variety of forms, including using information technology to provide individuals, corporations, non-profits and governments with information that enables the optimization of resources[2] through the redistribution, sharing and reuse of excess capacity in goods and services.[2][1][3] A common premise is that when information about goods is shared (typically via an online marketplace), the value of those goods may increase for the business, for individuals, for the community and for society in general.[***]
Collaborative consumption as a phenomenon is a class of economic arrangements in which participants share access to products or services, rather than having individual ownership.[03]
The concept of the sharing economy applied to insurance, can be a relevant premise, provided that it can deliver greater value to consumers while at the same time enabling large insurance companies to transform, sustainably to market transitions, and or enable themselves to participate in said market transformation, while at the same time opening themselves up to new, and/or previously unviable markets, through the scale of the system.
The value of P2P social insurance networks enabled by the blockchain is that it can draw on the benefits of decentralization, prediction markets, decentralized autonomous corporations, social networks and traditional insurance to create a superior product, by streamlining information, accessing underserved markets — viably, more accurately assess risk, as it can be market driven, and through dramatic cost reductions.
With more than seven billion people living in the world today, we’re realizing the importance and benefits of sharing. While most of the applications available now are fueling the shared economy, many of them use some sort of middleman. The inherent nature of the blockchain is that it allows people to manage and share their wealth without any intermediaries, with greater transparency, transnationally, and with market and network consensus on truth. This translates, simply, to efficiency, trust, and risk mitigated cost for both individuals and organizations.
Through social networks and decentralized autonomous corporations/organizations, a known, or unknown group of people, organized by interest or demographics can select its own members without being regulated by government bodies that have restrictive legislation; can then invite only those individuals who are more likely to be better risks because they are generally known — either in person or through social networks — to other members of the group.
This screening can prevent more risky participants to join the peer group and hence reduce the frequency and severity of events or claims eg. If the costs for everyone else in the group depend in part on one’s behavior, the group has an incentive to encourage one to act in a way that reduces the likelihood that any of us have a claim, when a lot of groups aren’t filing claims, that lowers the cost to all purchasing insurance.[04] Moreover, it’s not just policyholders who are benefiting from the social insurance model. Insurance companies stand to benefit as well.
I propose that under a P2P model, Insurance companies can expect happier, more loyal, and more engaged pool of customers, because they’re partaking in a more pleasurable user/customer experience, as the platform/marketplace is dis-intermediated, thus reducing the onerous task of acquiring insurance, as well as realizing tangible savings. This can only invariably lead to high overhead costs, particularly on fraudulent and small claims, shrink, while driving scale.
P2P Insurance
Innovators the world over are looking at ways to leverage the power of your social networks, and increasingly now the Blockchain, to reduce and distribute costs, provide more accurate, albeit market driven risk mitigation, while at the same time bypassing onerous regulatory impediments.
In today’s peer-to-peer models, insurance policyholders form small groups online. A part of the insurance premiums paid, flow into a group fund, the other part to the insurer. Minor damages to the insured policyholder are firstly paid out of this group fund. For claims above the deductible limit the regular insurer is called upon. When there is no insurance claim, the policyholder gets his/her share refunded from the group pool, or credited towards the next policy year. If the group pool happens to be empty, a special insurance comes into force[05]
A group can be set up by the policyholders, forming an “social insurance network”. The only requirement is that all group members must have the same type of insurance. Examples are liability insurance, household contents insurance, legal expenses insurance and electronics insurance. The peer-to-peer insurance concept carries no costs other than the special insurance. The providers are financed through brokerage commissions of insurance, in this case through a decentralized autonomous corporation existing within the blockchain.
Insurance rates are determined by how risky insurance companies think it is to cover you, or in tandem with what a second group of peers “predict” or assess your risk is based on thier based mostly on demographics, location, lifestyle and history. (More on this below in Prediction Markets). The fewer claims your group has, the less money you’ll spend with peer-to-peer insurance.
The goal of social insurance, in the context that I’m proposing, is to give people more control over potential insurance costs, arrive at a market derived risk assessment through prediction markets, cover deductibles, encourage safe behavior, lower rates and administrative costs, while at the same time by-passing staid regulation. The natural fit for this model is to utilize aspects of the blockchain, that can reduce friction in the transaction process, while providing a higher degree of information flow and market dynamics to drive out costs and promote adoption.
The Blockchain and Insurance
As I mentioned above, exploring how blockchain technology can interact with insurance, has become an endeavor that has led me to talk to many industry professionals, as well as entrepreneurs looking at possible implications in terms of the relationship between individuals, insurance and insurers; and current perspectives on the relevance and potential of blockchain technology. I have tried to distill as many concepts, or at the least the core elements here to describe, the discussions, however i would disclose that my views are skewed towards the challenger, with hopes that collaboration can create shared value for both the incumbent and challenger, but with aims to provide insurance products to markets that have been historically underserved — primarily the underinsured and uninsured.
Blockchain technology’s main innovation is an electronic public transaction record of integrity without central authority. Beside cryptocurrencies and distributed payment systems, blockchain applications could include areas of finance where a central, trusted third party has traditionally been used eg. escrow accounts, trade finance, and in this case insurance.
Blockchains can contain set of documents, record assets and help to manage interconnected devices. Emerging applications, such as smart contracts and decentralised autonomous organisations, might in future also permit blockchains to act as automated agents.[05]
Blockchain technology has the ability to transform the very way people engage and conduct finance, and close the gap, or make irrelevant the divide between global and local in payment and processing times; influence consumer perception of value added services; drive honesty and transparency; and, influence consumer perceptions of risk that could change the way insurers support mutualisation.
Non-insurers are more likely to be the first to create insurance or insurance-related applications. As we see with the innovative startups “Guevara”, and “Friendsurance”. However, I believe that companies of this nature can go even further, if enabled by Blockchain applications, and I expect to see more experimental startups add in enhancements to thier platforms that are likely to start with self sovereign digital identity systems, proof of existence functions and zero knowledge proofs to manage personal property and data.
Emerging Blockchains and Applications
Blockchain technology has the potential to enhance and create transformative financial services applications, including insurance. Through distributed applications hosted on decentralised platforms, such as: Bitcoin, the first blockchain protocol released in 2009; Ethereum, an open platform which could host distributed applications, namely smart contracts; “Bitshares” which boasts transaction speeds approaching Nasdaq; Eris, an Ethereum “Fork” and blockchain-manufacturing and management toolkit; or the much anticipated “Rootstock”, a smart-contract peer-to-peer platform built on top of the Bitcoin Blockchain, a more recent project which aims to provide Ethereum capabilities on top of the Bitcoin blockchain.
I’m eager to see how companies can support the automation of insurance products based on betting- like insurance products and financial derivative contracts.eg utilizing a platfom like Augur to integrate prediction markets into thier transacation process (more on this below)
Moreover, blockchain technology and distributed applications open up the range of assets and information that can be managed and stored on and from the blockchain, some of which can be relevant to insurance.
Interesting models include applications to create or store genetic and medical record data using for example Genecoin, which allows individuals to securely back up their own DNA by recording it on the blockchain or, DNA.Bits which aims to provide access to large samples of anonymised medical records and genetic data through the blockchain.[06]
Third, new insurance solutions could emerge to handle risks arising from blockchain technology usage (e.g. account hacking on exchange where individuals can buy AltCoins to participate on a blockchain), digital asset protection or even in relation to the security of Internet of Things solutions, depending on demand (i.e. the extent to which individuals want to outsource emerging risks to third party providers) and feasibility.[07]
Self Sovereign Identity
Blockchain technology and related applications can transform the way insurance companies manage and facilitate digital identity (ID), personal information and history. An ID scheme relying on a decentralised blockchain combining a public ledger of records with an adequate attestment and zero knowledge proofs, as I mentioned in a previous post could rival state-backed identity (which is generally checked against other databases, uses biometric data and is backed by law) in terms of security through decentralisation and cryptography.[08]
A number of digital ID schemes are emerging, including ONENAME, and OpenID Connect, a protocol combining an identity layer and an authorisation server, which allows clients of all types (e.g. developers) to request and receive information about authenticated session and end-users across websites and apps without having to own or manage password files.[09]
Creating a self sovereign digital ID that is trusted and can be used widely, In practice, would be a blockchain-based identity scheme that could take the form of a distributed application hosted on a blockchain protocol which could use arbitrators i.e. pre-determined experts authenticating documents or information submitted) or oracles allowed to cross-reference information securely with other data sources, including government attested documents
The application could enable additional functions including personal data storage, authorised access frameworks for external providers or even reputation ratings, most probably through connected social media, or transaction history etc..
Combining authentication and personal data management functionalities with decentralised and secure blockchains could lead to new frameworks for identity management.
In insurance, the streamlining of digital authentication and better management of personal data and history disclosure could translate into more direct and efficient relationships between insurance companies and individuals.[10]
Market Scale and Reach
Blockchains are distributed across networks of computers, themselves distributed across space. Blockchain technology has the potential to shape different interactions between individuals and places, further blurring the divide between local and global.[11]
Blockchain technology and related applications can be global in scope and in scale as to some extent the only requirement from a user perspective is to have a computer, smartphone an Internet, or wifi connection.
This scale and potential access to underserved regions of the world could support the tailoring of insurance products that are specifically designed where there is not sufficiently strong market demand (historically for legacy system) or enough quality data (e.g. creditworthiness).[12]
Where this can be directly applicable is Microinsurance, which is insurance characterized by small premiums and claim amounts, is an important risk management tool for the unbanked and uninsured in emerging markets around the world. Billions of individuals around the world do not have access to basic financial services such as banking and insurance. Access to this market has been hindered primarily by transaction costs and lack of verifiable and credible identification.Moreover, given my inclination to disruptive innovation, this falls directly in line with the now common understanding of a valuable form of innovation that incumbents should surely watch out for. The Notion that people can contract with each other round the globe using robust technology. More material in that people can handily set up local insurance vehicles easily. The mid-ground might be many local vehicles sharing global reserving or reinsuring facilities.
Widely distributed social insurance platforms, provided they get the scale and breakout velocity they need to reach these underserved markets could also see blockchain-based risk management models emerge, if not intended, including self-managed or administered risk protocols, peer-to-peer insurance platforms and even fully funded solutions. Over time disintermediation could take place as a result of automation, particularly for well known and perhaps more common risks.
Blockchain technology could support the rise of peer-to-peer insurance platforms and thus contribute to enabling self- and mutual- risk management frameworks. Distributed mutualisation combined with the ‘wisdom of crowds’ could support efficient claim management and fraud reduction.Further, such insurance mini- mutuals might increase the need and spread but perhaps reduce the size of typical reinsurance. Blockchain-based solutions could help to automate and achieve efficiency gains by using smart contracts, which in turn could lead to self-administration of certain insurance products, such as betting-like insurance products or hedging mechanisms (e.g. prediction markets). [13]
This is not a likely scenario in the near-term, but one could imagine a DAO contained in a completely automated blockchain. Customers would no longer rely on intermediaries, rather wholly on the technology and its persistence. Where the blockchain provides a platform for participants to take on pre-determined risk and manage it, possibly in conjunction with expert advice. As a result, in such instances, insurance companies’ role is likely to evolve from that of risk handlers to one of risk management advisors.[14]
As a result, the technology and its applications could eventually contribute to changing the role and function of insurers in society. Blockchain technology and distributed applications could for example support access to affordable and quality insurance products through distributed micro-insurance solutions combined with mobile technologies; or, by extending insurance product coverage to previously excluded populations, provided that adequate identity and information management functionalities (e.g. notary or personal data management function) are in place.[15]
Taking the concept of decentralised blockchain operated platforms further could lead to the emergence of decentralised marketplaces where insurance companies compete to meet the needs and requirements of clients or groups of clients whether in terms of insurance products or risk management expertise and advice.
Should this materialise at scale, the shift in insurers’ role from risk handler to expert advice and knowledge provider in relation to direct risk management (including preventive measures) is likely to be reinforced.[16]
Innovation and the Battle for the Future
Incumbents, or those in the industry that have come to sustain their lives and or business from the existing state of being, and the challengers who provoke thought and change within the landscape; think of the blockchain technology and related applications as something that could radically change the nature and scope of the insurance industry. While Incumbents are skeptical, yet curious, they lack the courage to make the required experiments that will provide the necessary transformation that will provide “competitive sustainability”. Challengers on the other hand, see the blockchain and the insurance landscape as fertile ground to experiment with new models, and revolutionary missions, that change the very notion of what insurance is, and can be, for a wider group of people around the world. Through disintermediation of the industry, the emergence of new actors, primarily small, innovative entrepreneurs, technologists, and startups are investigating distributed peer-to-peer insurance platforms, encouraging and empowering the self-management of; self-sovereign identity, risk verification, social networks, and collaborative consumption, thus contributing to changing the role of insurers to an actor in an ecosystem, as opposed to the centralizing force that controls and shapes the market.
For innovators, either in startups or incumbent companies, the blockchain is an exciting and positive development, however for those who do not understand the truly transformational potential of this technology, and the platform for creativity that can bare to be, it is a dangerous technology which will incur unintended consequences, mostly perceived as detrimental to the status quo.
Change is inevitable, in what incarnation that brings is unknown at this time, however, we know that it will radically change the notion of what insurance is, how it is delivered, and who it is delivered to, and under what circumstances. The landscape of the industry will change with the onset of blockchain technology, but in what form, will largely be determined by those innovators who successfully experiment with the technology and what their ideological perspective is, in deploying the technology to achieve their objectives. When the blockchain takes hold of the Insurance industry, and related applications emerge within markets known, and to be revealed; this will fundamentally change and open the market(s) to new third party providers/constituents other than insurers. The most likely, under the model I’m porposing, is crowds acting as markets that will shape the nature of the services and products. Some degree of centralisation is likely to stay, however, I believe that “swarms” or decentralized groups aggregating in collaboration, will most likely replace the centralizing economies of scale that have been the predominant nature of the industry up until this day. The emergence of peer-to-peer insurance platforms where perhaps the only aspect of the market that is ‘centralized” will be autonomous agents that provide the commercial touchpoint for the ecosystem to work effectively.
While blockchain technology offers dynamic and unknown prospects for the future of the Insurance industry, the most challenging, and disruptive elements exist within the context of the surrounding the legality and regulation of the related decentralized applications that make the entire technology relevant.
Decentralized Autonomous Insurance Brokerage
Decentralized Autonomous Corporations, “A ÐAO is an algorithmically-governed programme that, in using trustless decentralised computing, can serve as a way to formalise multilateral relationships or transactions outside of traditional legal architecture. These automatons exist entirely as decentralized networks over the internet, carrying out the computations that keep them “alive” over thousands of servers that live entirely on the cloud and yet control powerful financial resources and can incentivize people to do very real things in the physical world[17] and or Smart contracts, are like an autonomous agent that runs a certain piece of code every time a transaction is sent to it, and this code can modify the contract’s internal data storage or send transactions. Advanced contracts can even modify their own code. Smart contracts are an idea that has been around for several decades, but was given its current name and first substantially brought to the (cryptography-inclined) public’s attention by Nick Szabo in 2005. In essence, the definition of a smart contract is simple: a smart contract is a contract that enforces itself.[18] these applications are built “on top’, but more accurately within the blockchain network, which would facilitate a Peer-to-peer transaction network, processing reputation through prediction markets, and execute the tenets of a policy for a group, or pool of consumers is a new approach to the already innovative P2P insurance concept. It endeavors to create a free-market environment for insurance seekers, and insurers, while at the same time providing a third group of speculators the ability to manage risk prediction market based reputation.
By design, Insurance inherently becomes a matching market of sorts, where users have a notion of the risk and coverage of the “pool” or “group” and creators have a notion of price, and can participate in the underwriting in conjunction with an insurance company, or many.
In this scenario, there is minimal intermediation — which drives down costs for all parties, there is no centralized authority that sets value, the social network becomes a true, decentralized market guided by its users. See the essay Formalising and Securing Relationships on Public Networks by Nick Szabo to learn more on the subject.[19]
Nick Szabo uses the example of a vending machine:
A canonical real-life example, which we might consider to be the primitive ancestor of smart contracts, is the humble vending machine. Within a limited amount of potential loss (the amount in the till should be less than the cost of breaching the mechanism), the machine takes in coins, and via a simple mechanism, which makes a freshman computer science problem in design with finite automata, dispense change and product according to the displayed price. The vending machine is a contract with bearer: anybody with coins can participate in an exchange with the vendor. The lockbox and other security mechanisms protect the stored coins and contents from attackers, sufficiently to allow profitable deployment of vending machines in a wide variety of areas.
Smart contracts are the application of this concept to, well, lots of things. We can have smart financial contracts that automatically shuffle money around based on certain formulas and conditions, smart domain name sale orders that give the domain to whoever first sends in $200, perhaps even smart insurance contracts that control bank accounts and automatically pay out based on some trusted source (or combination of sources) supplying data about real-world events.[21]
As you can see from above, Smart contracts are modular, repeatable, autonomous scripts, which can be used to build applications for yourself, for a community, for a client, for a bounty, or even for autonomous, self executing insurance policies.
Smart contracts can be coded to reflect any kind of business or engineering logic which is data-driven: from actions as simple as up-voting a post on a forum, in this case a prediction market tied to risk of the policy, or to the more complex, such as loan collateralisation and futures contracts, to the highly complex such as repayment prioritisation on a structured note.
By building business logic in smart contracts, developers (and lawyers) can give their users and clients an increase in the verifiability and certainty which comes with distributed technology while simultaneously building a system of rules which will be structured so that it can supersede regulation, as in the case of cross-state insurance regulation in the United States, as well as provide clear self-execution procedures for consumers to enable the automation of insurance brokerage.
What about the brokers as they exist right now you might ask? Let us step back for a moment from the specifics of smart contracts and think about a commercial deal which will involve many entities of different data-driven interactions within the market and the life of the application. How innovators for the commercial entities would likely structure the administration of the data driven aspects of the deal would be to establish a tracking system which is completely under the control of that commercial entity and, perhaps, provide some programmatic interface for others to query records or send new information regarding a record. It is likely that each of these dozen commercial entities will each establish a similar system to monitor and track the data interactions over the course of the deal. Therefore, in the case of the brokers, their role, as with the role of the insurers and everyone else on the network their actions will change, their competencies will need to change, but fundamentally, they will be required, however in a largely different capacity. It can be imagined that their role will essentially be the same, however, their efforts may be directed and facilitated through social media, or digitally, as a way to engage uninsured, or underinsured candidates to sign up to pools. They would become actors in the digital space that would be compensated for their ability to onboard constituents to the platform.
This is where the execution certainty of smart contracts married with the historical transaction certainty of a blockchain should become increasingly interesting for commercial players, now and into the future. If the commercial entities were wise about how they structured the deal, they could track all of their data-driven interactions on a smart contract-enabled blockchain without having to build twelve different systems, ensure their interoperability, and expend labour-time to appropriately categorize and file relevant transactional data. Every entity having access to the blockchain will be able to completely verify the entirety of the interactions as well as the entire history of the data set, which would be automatically maintained over the life of the deal and summarised at its conclusion.
While the different commercial entities may be legally incorporated and would not be required to move to a completely trustless system of the kind described above, they would all experience significant cost savings from the increased verifiability and automation a blockchain-based smart contract system would permit.
Mitigating Legal, Regulatory and Policy Frameworks with Smart Contracts and DAOs
Smart Contracts: self-enforceability vs. legal enforceability
Smart contracts also eliminate the need for trust amongst the parties, who can be sure that the contract will be performed exactly as agreed. Indeed, as opposed to traditional legal contracts, smart contracts are always and necessarily deterministic — i.e. all possible outcomes of the contract (including penalties for breach of contract) must be explicitly stipulated in advance — something akin to what liquidated damages clauses and letters of credit do in the paper world..[22]
Discussion is currently very focused on the technical aspects of smart contract deployment and their implementation within a particular technological framework. Smart contract proponents claim that many contractual clauses could be made partially or fully self-executing, self-enforcing, or both. Smart contracts aim to provide security superior to traditional contract law and to reduce other transaction costs associated with contracting. Some even propose a future where self-enforcing algorithmic law would supplant traditional law.
Yet, many people forget that these applications are meant to operate in a world that is regulated by traditional rules of law. While smart contracts are increasingly able to handle complex deal logics, many kinds of transactions do — eventually — have to interface with the “real world”. It is at those “choke points” that the legal system will ultimately have a say in the context of a breach.
In this regard, one important question is to determine whether smart contracts are in fact actionable in the real world. While they can be regarded, at their core, as a written contract drafted in a computer language, it is not clear — at this date — whether their code is “legally binding” upon the parties interacting with these contracts. Legal enforceability would essentially allow for only the main-case set to be handled by smart-contracts, leaving the edge-case set to be handled by the courts.[23]
Most importantly, in many real-world situations, contracts are performed without the need to be enforced by law, as the threat of one party resorting to the legal system is sufficient for the other party to comply with the contracted terms. In order to be as effective as their traditional counterparts, smart contracts must therefore also be actionable in the real world. This might, of course, requires them to comply with all the standard formalities required for a court to enforce a contract under the law.
I would propose through another interesting blockchain company and tool developer Eris Industries, a way to extend the reach of blockchain-based transactions by having smart contracts render into conventional legal documents. This allows for the smart contracts (as the administration layer) to remain simple, while relying on the legal contracts (as the enforcement layer) to handle the edge cases.
The Blockchain and Dual Legal Integration
Dual integration is the process of integrating a specific legal contract (which can be built with Legal Markdown or any other contract building system) into a specific smart contract which runs on a distributed data store such as Eris Industries’ [24]
The idea of dual integration is to allow users to be able to have the certainty of having a real world contract which can be taken to a court and enforced using established dispute resolution processes in the jurisdiction(s) of the user(s) while also using a smart contract as the primary mechanism for administering the data-driven interaction which attends to the agreement between the parties.
For another system which is also seeking to bridge this gap see Primavera de Filippi’s Draft Legal Framework For Crypto-Ledger Transactions.[25]
The reason Eris Industries recommends to all users of Distributed Technology, and particularly smart contracts, to dual-integrate their smart contracts with real world legal contracts built by lawyers qualified in the jurisdiction(s) that will be relevant to the agreement, is simple. Smart contracts are necessarily limited.
As they are, at their core, just scripts which live in a distributed data store, the pure code of a smart contract has a limited ability to “reach” outside the context of their data store to incorporate a legally-binding contractual understanding. While they are capable of being structured in a manner which would automatically administer a data-driven interaction and ensure harmony of the data set in which the smart contracts reside (if they have permissions to do so),judges are unlikely, for the foreseeable future, to be able to easily resolve disputes stemming from smart contracts solely on the basis of their coded parameters (meaning without an integrated legal contract) without simply applying the commercial defaults for the agreement in the jurisdiction — an end that is unlikely to reflect the intention of the parties to the agreement in question. For these reasons of the limited reach of smart contracts and the limited enforceability of smart contracts, we highly encourage all smart contract systems developers to utilize dual integration of some kind.
Risk and Transactional Insurance Prediction Markets
Market-based principles can be used to manage the risk of distributed peer-to-peer transactions. This is demonstrated by PTRIM, (Peer-to-Peer Transaction Risk Management) a system that builds a transaction default market on top of a main transaction processing system, within which peers offer to underwrite the transaction risk for a slight increase in the transaction cost. Essentially a Peer-to-peer prediction network to facilitate the truth of market/network risk and reputation in processing a transaction within a financial market.
Prediction markets (also known as predictive markets, information markets, decision markets, idea futures, event derivatives, or virtual markets) are exchange-traded markets created for the purpose of trading the outcome of events. The market prices can indicate what the crowd thinks the probability of the event is. A prediction market contract trades between 0 and 100%. It is a binary option that will expire at the price of 0 or 100%.
Research has suggested that prediction markets are at least as accurate as other institutions predicting the same events with a similar pool of participants[26] this has a profound, if not purely innovative approach to assessing risk in an insurance network. The insurance cost, determined through market-based mechanisms, is a way of identifying untrustworthy peers and perilous transactions. The risk of the transactions is contained, and at the same time members of the peer-to-peer network capitalise on their market knowledge by profiting as transaction insurers.
It is being progressively recognised that information systems and applications supporting collaborative tasks, including online transaction processing systems, that currently follow centralized client-server models can also be based on the maturing wave of peer-to-peer architectures [27,28]. In order to manage and reduce the risk inherent in peer-to-peer transactions and their decentralised and uncontrolled environment, a variety of approaches have been proposed, with reputation and trust management systems being the most prominent.[29]
These aim to provide peers with estimates of the risk involved in their transactions, based on the observed past behaviour of their counterparties. Though reputation management systems (either centralized or distributed) offer a lot in this direction, the information they provide about past behaviour may not be enough to accurately assess the risk involved in a transaction.
On top of a generic transaction processing system, PTRIM creates a peer-to-peer transaction insurance market-like layer that is used to manage the risk of transaction default. The transacting peers have the option to request offers from peers in this layer to underwrite the risk of their transaction, and therefore alleviate themselves from the need to collect, process and evaluate reputation information.[30]

Image credit: A Market-Based approach to Managing the Risk of Peer-to-Peer Transactions
A transaction default market is thus built on top of the main transaction processing system, within which the cost of “insuring” a transaction is determined through market-based mechanisms. The main contribution of our approach is that it proposes a novel way of identifying untrustworthy peers and perilous transactions, based on the insurance offers the market will produce; the risk of peer-to-peer transactions is contained at a small additional cost; and at the same time, our system showcases a way for members of a peer-to-peer network to participate in a new profitable role, as transaction insurers.
Our approach for managing the risk of distributed peer-to-peer transactions is based on the principles governing financial markets. PTRIM builds and utilises a transaction default market on top of a main transaction processing system, within which peers offer to underwrite the transaction risk for a slight increase in the transaction cost.[31]
The cost is determined through market-based mechanisms, and forms a way of identifying untrustworthy peers and perilous transactions. The risk of the transactions is effectively minimised while the transacting peers are alleviated from the need to collect, process and evaluate reputation information. At the same time our system showcases a way for members of a peer-to-peer network to capitalise on their market knowledge by participating in a new role, as transaction insurers.
The PTRIM approach can be considered as an alternative, but also as complementary to the use of distributed reputation management systems. Under this system, individuals would vote not on whether or not to implement particular policies, but rather on a metric to determine how well their country (or charity or company) is doing, and then “prediction markets” would be used to pick the policies that best optimize the metric.
Essentially, you are literally putting your money where your mouth is. Second, over time the market has an evolutionary pressure to get better; the individuals who are bad at predicting the outcome of policies will lose money, and so their influence on the market will decrease, whereas the individuals who are good at predicting the outcome of policies will see their money and influence on the market increase.
The system also elegantly combines public participation and professional analysis. Many people decry democracy as a descent to mediocrity and demagoguery, and prefer decisions to be made by skilled technocratic experts. Individual experts and even entire analysis firms to make individual investigations and analyses, incorporate their findings into the decision by buying and selling on the market, and make a profit from the differential in information between themselves and the public[32]
So what are the practical benefits of adopting such a scheme? What is wrong with simply having blockchain-based organizations that follow more traditional models of governance, or even more democratic ones? Cryptographic protocols have a much lower need for trusting central authorities (if you are not inclined to distrust central authorities, the argument can be more accurately rephrased as “cryptographic protocols can more easily generalize to gain the efficiency, equity and informational benefits of being more participatory and inclusive without leading to the consequence that you end up trusting unknown individuals”).[33]
Conclusion
The potential for blockchain technology to significantly transform the way the insurance industry operates in the near term, is inevitable. The question is who will do it, and what will it look like?
Blockchain technology adoption and the development of related applications in insurance is likely to depend on insurance industry practitioners and their readiness and appetite, however innovative startups around the world are challenging the notion of what this future might look like, which may force incumbents to adopt new ways of doing business faster than they expect.
Insurance players, their digital innovation units in particular, need to “explore and exploit” in order to manage evolutionary and revolutionary change. Explore the power of this new tool, yet exploit their existing business in order to provide the necessary framework to manage innovation in their space properly.
I hope that these some of the ideas and applications that I have described above, have inspired you to think about, what is out there, and what is possible with blockchain technology. Moreover, I hope that whatever you create solves a massive and important problem in the world, and makes the insurance industry work better for consumers and society.
The second half of this article explores solutions and uses cases that cover:
MHealth Platforms, the Blockchain and Wearable Technology
Automobile Telematics, Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning for Risk Adjusted Premiums
Multi-sided Insurance Platforms and Market Design
If you are interested in reading the rest of this whitepaper, please feel free to contact me here on linkedin , or by email at collin@intrepid.ventures.com
Collin Thompson is the Co-founder, and Managing Director of Intrepid Ventures, a venture development firm that invests, builds, and accelerates Blockchain and IoT companies solving the world’s most difficult problems. Collin focuses on early stage investments, innovation and business design for corporations, governments and entrepreneurs working with Blockchain Technology.

Pence says Obamacare ‘failed’ Kentucky, where 500,000 gained insurance through the law
In 2013, 20.4% of Kentuckians were uninsured. In 2016, 7.8% were.
Vice President Mike Pence CREDIT: AP Photo/John Minchillo
Speaking in Louisville, Kentucky on Saturday, Vice President Mike Pence called Obamacare a “nightmare,” and said that Kentucky was a “textbook case of Obamacare’s failures.”
There’s only one problem with those statements — Obamacare provided insurance to 20 million Americans, and Kentucky has actually been one of Obamacare’s biggest success stories.
In 2013, 20.4 percent of Kentucky residents were uninsured. In 2016, that number had fallen to 7.8 percent. Kentucky governor Matt Bevin, who actually campaigned on getting rid of Obamacare, found once he entered office that because the health care plan was helping so many people, he couldn’t kill it easily. Instead, he merely rebranded the law to make it more friendly to conservatives.
Many people in Kentucky now have insurance through the expansion of Medicaid, which was a central part of Obamacare, or Kynect, which is Kentucky’s name for its Obamacare exchange.

Before Pence’s speech on Saturday, Louisville mayor Greg Fischer released a statement urging the vice president and the rest of the federal government to “slow down and get health care right — for the sake of 500,000 Kentuckians, including 100,000 Louisville residents, who have garnered coverage under the Affordable Care Act.”
But patience is not a virtue this administration has been shown to value. This week, House Republicans released their official plan to repeal and replace Obamacare. The Trumpcare plan includes massive cuts to Medicaid, defunds Planned Parenthood, eliminates abortion coverage, and provides a huge tax break for CEOs of insurance companies making over $500,000 a year. It is being opposed by a wide range of groups, from the American Medical Association to America’s Health Insurance Plans.
It would also significantly raise prices for the poor, particularly those who are older.
Just two days after that plan was unveiled to the public, the House Ways and Means Committee advanced the legislation without any changes at 4:30 a.m. with a 23–16 vote in the bill’s favor. It is clear that supporters of the bill, including President Trump and House Speaker Paul Ryan, are trying to fast-track the bill through Congress despite the fact that the Congressional Budget Office hasn’t yet released a report estimating the cost and how many people could lose coverage under the bill.
Obamacare and the Affordable Care Act are the same thing
They are the same, not different.thinkprogress.org
Pence’s speech in Kentucky — which also addressed strengthening our military and stopping undocumented immigrants from crossing the border, and Trump’s Supreme Court nomination — didn’t include many details at all about the new health care legislation. Instead, he focused on the anti-Obamacare talking points that Trump campaigned on, mainly the cost and the lack of competition in the marketplace.
While nobody is arguing that Obamacare is perfect and can’t be improved, repealing the bill without a comprehensive replacement plan would be extremely damaging. One report estimates that the Obamacare repeal could cost the United States 1.2 million jobs. Most significantly, more than 36,000 people could die each year without it, including Kentucky residents.
“Of course I worry about if my cancer were to come back what would happen, but now I have to add to that what would happen if I lose my health insurance,” cancer survivor and Kentucky resident Leah Briemer, who credits the Affordable Care Act for saving her life, told ABC News last month. “My daughter’s 18. She’s graduating from high school. I need to be here for my daughter. Help her get through college. Help her have a wedding. See my grandchildren be born.”
She added, “When something’s working for so many people and you decide you’re going to take it away. And you say it’s horrible, it’s not working for anyone, even though it is, yeah that’s playing politics with my life and many others.”

The afterlife insurance policy
Image: Nanda Green
Unfortunately, for a lot of religious folks out there, this is the extent to which they venture in their faith.
An afterlife insurance policy.
Years and years of church on Sundays. 
Years and years of accessibility to timeless wisdom in their Good Book.
And it sits mostly unopened. 
To be taken at uninterpreted face value by the voice from the pulpit.
Sterile. 
Shallow.
Childish.
Restricting.
All for an afterlife insurance policy.
What a divine opportunity they pass up. This life is too short to not explore the depths, work through the doubt, and unlock the ancient mysteries of what lies within the poetry and story of a living faith.
There’s more there that lies unopened.
More value to this life before death.
Jonas writes short stories and preachments about spiritual, whimsical, creative matters on the daily here in Higher Thoughts. Get one to enjoy with your coffee every morning by subscribing here.

GOP congressman says fewer people with health insurance is a ‘good thing’
Shhhhhh. You weren’t supposed to say that part out loud.
Rep. Mike Burgess (R-TX) CREDIT: AP Photo/Evan Vucci
Republican efforts to build a more laissez-faire health system are “doomed to fail,” conservative health policy writer Philip Klein admitted in a candid column last month, unless they are willing to state an uncomfortable truth: Republicans must acknowledge that they “don’t believe that it is the job of the federal government to guarantee that everybody has health insurance.”
A handful of GOP lawmakers are now taking up Klein’s charge — with one of them even claiming that a Republican plan that leads to a higher national uninsurance rate would be a good thing.
“If the numbers drop,” Rep. Mike Burgess (R-TX) said Thursday at the Conservative Political Action Conference, “I would say that’s a good thing.” He went on to argue that more people without health care would be a positive thing for the United States because it would mean that “we’ve restored personal liberty in this country.”
Trump voters covered by Obamacare don’t like the GOP’s health care ideas
The GOP’s plan takes away the things they like, and makes the things they dislike worse.thinkprogress.org
Burgess’ prediction that Republican health plans will lead to a drop in the national insurance rate was echoed by Rep. Dennis Ross (R-FL) in an interview with Bloomberg this week. “Not everybody is going to have health care” under a Republican health plan, Ross said. “Some people just don’t care enough about their own care.”
Bloomberg also shares some details about the health policy ideas that are starting to gain traction among Republican lawmakers. While the full contours of the GOP’s “replacement” for Obamacare remain elusive, the details we do know off confirm that yes, Republicans are indeed pushing ideas that would lead to fewer people receiving care.
More expensive plans for people who can’t afford it
The Affordable Care Act tackles two interlocking challenges. Older Americans tend to have more medical expenses, and thus pay higher health premiums that may be unaffordable for many of these individuals. Meanwhile, many Americans simply don’t earn enough income to be able to afford insurance.
Obamacare provides that insurers cannot charge their oldest customers more than three times as much as their youngest customers. Meanwhile, it provides tax credits that help low-to-moderate income individuals pay for their insurance. These tax credits are higher for people with lower incomes, due to the fact that people who are less-well-off will have less ability to pay insurance premiums without greater financial assistance.
Several Republican proposals would increase the amount that insurers could charge older Americans. A bill would increase the age band from 5 to 1 (above the current range of 3 to 1). One of the more comical ideas to emerge from the Trump administration was a proposal to interpret existing law to allow insurers to charge older individuals 3.49 times as much as younger consumers, on the theory that 3.49 rounds down to 3. (This later proposal appears to have been scrapped.)
Meanwhile, according to Bloomberg, Republicans hope to base tax credits on a person’s age rather than on their income. Such a proposal could simultaneously be wasteful and merciless, since an age-based formula could allow wealthy individuals who can afford to pay their own premiums to still receive a government subsidy — while also denying low-income Americans the assistance they need to purchase insurance at all.
Driving up costs and collapsing entire insurance markets
Another idea that is reportedly gaining steam among Republicans is a proposal to “do away with the Affordable Care Act’s requirement that all Americans have health coverage or pay a fine, and replace it with rules that let people choose not to buy insurance, instead paying higher premiums or penalties if they need it later.”
Though the details of such a proposal are sparse — just how much higher would premiums be if someone delays buying health insurance until they get sick? — such a proposal risks driving up the cost of care for people who are already insured, or, worse, collapsing entire insurance markets altogether.
The reason why the Affordable Care Act penalizes people who do not carry insurance is because of the risk that people will wait until they are sick to become insured and then drain all the money out of an insurance pool that they haven’t paid into.
Because Obamacare forbids insurers from denying coverage to people with preexisting conditions, insurers cannot simply refuse to cover people with expensive conditions. If the ratio of healthy people to sick people in a given insurance plan tilts too heavily towards people with expensive conditions, however, then the plan will need to jack up premiums in order to cover the costs of its most expensive consumers.
That risks setting off a “death spiral,” where healthy people leave the plan due to rising premiums, which forces the insurer to raise premiums even more, which causes even more healthy people to leave. Eventually, the entire insurance pool collapses.
Obamacare solves this problem by requiring people who don’t carry insurance to pay higher income taxes, thus giving them an incentive to enter an insurance pool while they are still healthy. Republicans reportedly want to eliminate this provision and, instead, charge a penalty to people who wait too long to buy insurance.
It’s far from clear, however, that such a mechanism would be sufficient to ward off death spirals. Imagine a hypothetical consumer, for example, who has to choose between paying $200 a month now, or to pay nothing now — but with the caveat that they will be charged $1,000 a month if they are later diagnosed with a catastrophic illness. Many people are likely to decide that they should pay nothing now and hope for the best, especially since, even in the worst case scenario, they will still have the option to buy insurance when they need it most.
Alternatively, Republicans could set the penalties for remaining insured so high that insurance would be unaffordable for someone who waits until they are seriously ill to buy insurance. That would have the virtue of helping to ward off a death spiral, but at the cost of many people’s lives.


Where is all the innovation in insurance? Let the capital flow.
A giant and heavily regulated industry which many would argue has lost sight of its customers should be ripe for attack. After all, entrepreneurs are tackling some of the toughest challenges in sectors like healthcare, transportation and financial services, using software to radically transform the product offering. Yet insurance has been overlooked, protected by large capital requirements and regulatory complexity.
No more. We’re engaging with a new generation of insurance companies, founded by entrepreneurs who want to take on this $3.5 trillion industry.
Insurance companies’ biggest oversight is simple: they have not been serving their customers. Actually, they rarely interact with their customers, since the vast majority of their business comes through brokers. Brokers are treated as their customers, and collect $45 billion of fees every year from insurers globally. It should come as no surprise that the web and mobile customer experience for consumer and SME insurance is shocking, since the DNA of most insurance companies is heavily B2B. They don’t know how to relate to end-consumers. (In this post, I am primarily referring to consumers and SMEs, rather than large corporate customers that continue to be served well by insurers.)
There are a few notable exceptions, such as GEICO and Progressive in the US and Admiral in the UK, that have demonstrated the economic benefits of going direct, eliminating broker commissions and building a more engaged customer relationship. And some insurance companies are slowly waking up to the need to develop consumer DNA, and to rebuild their internal systems to support a direct model. But most of this is invisible to their end-customers and has little positive impact near-term. The banks are a few years ahead on re-designing legacy infrastructure to support a new customer paradigm; we are sceptical that their transformation will be fast enough, which suggests that insurers too will struggle to compete with focused new entrants.
The broken customer value proposition
Most consumers view insurance as a tax on their income and do not look forward to the annual communication from their broker/insurance company containing the renewal premium. To begin with, it has often increased, inexplicably, from the prior year, even in the absence of any claim. Second, consumers also don’t believe their insurance company will fully pay out, even when they have a legitimate claim. As a result, end-customers have limited brand loyalty to their insurer, especially for property & casualty and for health insurance. Third, the customer experience is consistently poor. One notable exception is claims handling, although that has less value since claims may only occur every 5 years or so.
All this leads to a situation where consumers churn frequently and shop around heavily based on price. They know that insurers quote lower prices for new customers, and then hike prices in year 2 — new customers are basically subsidized by those who don’t churn — which in turn creates a vicious cycle, incentivizing customers to switch constantly. There remains some loyalty in life insurance, but only because it is so painful to get through the upfront paperwork and medical exam that most consumers cannot be bothered to switch.
Finally, not only is the overall customer proposition weak, but the insurance industry is one of the biggest laggards in developing even minimally acceptable online and mobile customer experiences.
These factors create opportunities for startups at various parts of the insurance value chain, across property & casualty, health, and life insurance:
The next generation broker
Brokers can and do play an important role in ensuring that a customer understands the nuances of the product and that it matches their needs. However, brokers must adapt as software encroaches on their world. In wealth management, the role of the broker is being disrupted by new robo-advisor services such as Wealthfront and Betterment, and brokers such as Charles Schwab are reacting by offering their own automated investing products (for free in Schwab’s case) and investing in more powerful tools to improve the advice they provide. In real estate, Compass’s software enables brokers to reduce the time spent in the office on paperwork and admin, freeing them to get out and market properties. Compass has attracted many top-producing brokers from other firms because of the boost to income that can result from operating on their platform.
In insurance, the first internet product innovation came with the price comparison sites with their lead-gen models — services like Moneysupermarket in the UK, and Check24 in Germany (an investment Simon worked with pre-Mosaic). More recently, tech-powered next-gen brokers have emerged, including Knip and GetSafe in Europe, and Policy Genius, Coverhound and TheZebra in the US. But the state of insurers’ APIs (or lack thereof) makes it difficult for brokers to offer a comprehensive and seamless customer experience for finding and purchasing the right policy, so customers often have to make at least one phone call to complete the process — not ideal at all.
Innovating on insurance structure
There is plenty of (re-)insurance capital interested in supporting new insurance products and models; the problem is connecting it to the entrepreneurs that are doing the innovating. Founders of insurance startups discover that even if they have end-customer demand for their product, finding a licensed insurance company to underwrite policies is not straightforward. The world of underwriting has become homogenized in recent years, with standardization of ratings tables and very little creativity allowed by corporate guidelines. This was one of the the key issues highlighted at a “Future of Insurance” roundtable hosted recently by Mosaic. One entrepreneur complained underwriters are “box tickers called Derek, who probably still live with their Mum, sitting in regional offices across Europe, without any ability or license to price a risk outside their nice square box”. And the insurance market and its capital that funds traditional underwriters does not have a good mechanism to bypass them and more directly fund innovators.
Founders such as Steven Mendel at BoughtbyMany are trying to tackle this challenge by moving up the value chain and taking more of an active role in underwriting, in close collaboration with several insurance partners. BoughtbyMany is going after white space, assembling groups of people with very specific insurance needs (e.g. users of quad-bikes or owners of classic cars) who cannot easily find (affordable) insurance as individuals — BoughtbyMany can negotiate discounts by aggregating them into larger groups. However, even with the scale of these groups of customers, insurance capital was not easily flowing into the groups, and BoughtbyMany recently acquired a traditional insurance broker that came with a set of underwriter relationships, so they could underwrite these policies themselves.
For founders who want to have complete control over their product, pricing, go-to-market and target customer profile, which is typically true with the most ambitious founders we know, then they need to become a “full-stack” insurance company, with their own underwriting capability. They may choose to outsource claims management or medical assessments, but without being able to issue their own paper, they will always be beholden to one or more underwriters. The regulatory capital requirements to become an underwriter actually start quite low at approximately $5 million in Europe or the US, and once an insurance business is up and running, the cash flow characteristics can be attractive, as Warren Buffett has demonstrated with his 50 year track record in insurance. Startups may be able to fund marketing from their float, but they will need to increase their capital base if they grow their book very fast.
Venture capital investors have different return profiles from insurers/reinsurers and to date have shown limited appetite for a blended VC/reinsurance return on their capital. This may be a mistake given the overall returns available to innovators in this space. Oscar has raised over $370 million of smart venture capital in the health insurance business, a large portion of which has been invested as regulatory capital to support underwriting their health insurance policies. Some entrepreneurs are looking at structures in which they finance their operating business with VC money and their captive underwriting vehicle with reinsurance capital, which may get around this issue. And startups such as Uvamo are exploring using a P2P marketplace to provide underwriting capital.
The mutual insurance model
The Hand in Hand Fire & Life Insurance Society was one of the oldest British insurance companies, founded in 1696 right after the Great Fire of London. It was the first mutual model of insurance which was owned and run for the benefit of its members — they were one of the first peer-to-peer finance startups. Members would pay their premia into a single pool and claims would be paid out. At year-end, if there was money left in the pool, members would receive a dividend. Guevara is a new Mosaic-backed team that is building a similar peer-to-peer model (albeit 300 years later), with a product that enables small groups of people with common relationships to form and be incentivized to keep claims low. We are excited about the potential of a peer-to-peer model in insurance that can fuel low-cost customer acquisition, motivate members to minimise losses, and enjoy low churn, with any benefits realised in the form of lower premia in future years.
New risk pools
Technology also enables insurance opportunities in new areas. Cyber-security is one of the fastest growing new areas within insurance. In the same way that Zenefits monetises its software through selling insurance policies, we think that cyber-security software startups may use an insurance product to underpin their business model. We also believe that on-demand insurance enabled by smartphones will be important — rather than annual coverage, Uber drivers may be offered buy coverage by the hour (e.g. Cuvva), Airbnb hosts by the night or Taskrabbits by the day, and in emerging markets this may become the standard for how insurance is sold. Existing actuarial models and claims data are not easily applied to new risk pools, and therefore startups have an opportunity to address these under-served markets.
Robo-advisor powered life insurance
Old fashioned life insurance as a protection product is in decline. At today’s mortality rates, consumers see limited value in paying 40 years worth of premia without seeing a pot of money build up over time. Consumers prefer to see life insurance as a long-term savings product that can support them and their families after retirement or death, which may make sense once the tax benefits of a pension or 401k have been maximised. Robo-advisor platforms (such as Wealthfront) are best positioned to provide this type of “life insurance”, rather than the current crop of confusing and expensive products from large insurers such as Allianz, Aviva, or AXA, with embedded and hidden costs of 300–600bps compared to 20bps for Wealthfront.
As you can tell, we think the insurance industry is ripe for founders to tackle head-on. For consumers, it’s clear there is an unmet need: if only there was a value proposition where a customer could pay a premium that reflects their true risk profile and, in the event of a claim, take out their “insurance claim card” and pay for all reasonable expenses with it. There are many opportunities resulting from this, none of which are straightforward, but the prizes will be large. Insurance capital will need to flow to these entrepreneurs to underwrite risk, in partnership with venture capital to fund operations. If you are working on an ambitious startup in this area, we would love to hear from you.
Toby
Additional Recent Posts from the Mosaic Ventures Team:
The Challenges Of Building AI Apps — Artificial intelligence has an intellectual lineage stretching back to the greats of computer theory, Turing and ultimately Babbage, inventor of the calculating machine. What we now see in London, where leading teams such as Deep Mind are working on machine learning, is the movement from the realm of computer science to practical uses, and business cases…Read More
Our Investment in Clue — We are entering the age of the “quantified self”. Low-cost sensors and smartphones mean we can sense, track and interpret aspects of our lives which would once have required teams of doctors. It’s now easy to input data, and share that data with physicians and family members with the peace of mind that the data is secure and private. All this means we can build a health profile that provides greater control, allowing us to find the right medical advice and services when we need them…Read More
Messaging & Notifications: The New Platforms — In Britain users spend as much time on WhatsApp as they do on Facebook mobile and Snapchat accounts for 75% of all messaging data traffic on Vodafone’s UK network. However, it isn’t just the UK where chat app popularity has exploded: the 10 biggest messaging apps — Facebook Messenger, KakaoTalk, Kik, Line, Skype, SnapChat, WeChat, WhatsApp, Tango, Viber — boast more than 3 billion users…Read More

You can follow us on twitter @Mosaic_VC, Linkedin, Facebook and Angelist

Camilla Perkins illustration.
Recent Email Sent By Insurance Company CEO to Patients Who Will Be Denied Healthcare Coverage
Once the Affordable Care Act is Repealed
Dear Valued Customer:
Here at MediAlliedBarnes&NobleExxonHealth, our mission is to provide patients with access to quality, affordable healthcare. In the last month, we’ve received thousands of messages from community members concerned about the repeal of Obamacare. We want you to know WE HEAR YOU™! And while it’s true, those with pre-existing conditions will soon be denied care, we wish you well as you continue your journey without us, without any insurance whatsoever.
As a gesture of good will, we suggest the following alternative therapies as possible solutions to meet your healthcare needs:
Those suffering with CANCER could take a trip to a sacred Inca site for a weekend of meditation and communion with Earth Mother (“Pachamama”). A group of mystics can be found wandering around Lake Poopó, and are available to perform various shamanistic rituals and tarot card readings.
ALZHEIMER’S is a terrible disease that will no longer be covered. Patients are encouraged to get a puzzle book, maybe take up Sudoku. Before she died, my Aunt Helen had this little bag of healing crystals that she carried around in her purse. They helped her manage symptoms. Another thing you could do is get a miniature bonsai plant to cheer yourself up.
All patients with DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, and MOOD DISORDERS will now be denied insurance. While this is unfortunate, I’m pleased to announce a new initiative, inspired by our recent merger with Barnes and Noble: a 15% discount on all purchases of the book The Secret, to help you manifest a happier future. Just enter the code: “PositiveVibesOnly” at check-out.
All claims for PEDIATRIC CONDITIONS will automatically be denied, so try to get a relaxed, carefree baby who doesn’t have any problems. Otherwise, you’re on your own.
ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION is another pre-existing condition we won’t be covering any longer. However, a prominent British sexologist has shown rubbing avocado paste down there might help, so you could try that.
The best of luck, and good health to you all!
Sincerely,
Dr. Dick McGall
CEO, MediAlliedBarnes&NobleExxonHealth
M.D. ,M.B.A.
“MediAlliedBarnes&NobleExxonHealth: WE HEAR YOU™!”


While Insurance is a massive industry, for example net premiums for life and P&C insurance the US are estimated worth around $1,000,000,000,000 (yes that is twelve zeros) I believe it has just been barely affected by the massive software driven changes that other industries are experiencing.
At core, the Insurance industry is impacted by the same underlying trends as the Banking Industry:
Transparency
Online comparators have brought unheard of transparency in pricing. In markets such as the UK, 56% of consumers declared having used a price comparison website in the last 2 years. This is no exception that Google started its move in the insurance space there. In the US, a growing number of companies are looking to play this role, positioning themselves as broker with examples such as Coverhound and Policy Genius.
But that transparency is starting to expand beyond just pricing but how an insurance policy covers an individual’s risk at granular level. In mass market, insurance products, while relevant to the risk profile of the individual from the perspective of the insurer, tend to lack detailed granular level from the perspective of the customer. Companies, such as Trov (disclosure: Anthemis is an investor), are helping to create this customisation in the Home Content insurance by allowing coverage of key items vs having a policy with a coverage set with averaged amounts. Metromile is another example in the motor insurance industry.
Impact of Digital on Distribution
The Insurance Industry, due to its specificities, has evolved to a reseller model (whether captive or independent). However with online distribution channels becoming increasingly primary channels, will the insurance agent suffer the same fate as the bank branch? As digital distribution channels prefer scale, it can be expected that markets with a large number of small broker players will face intense consolidation going forward, as shown by the rapid consolidation of the UK insurance market. The success of Direct Distribution models in some countries, including China, can also be be a hint to what is coming next. Will the brokers be disintermediated? Or will they find new value add activities to justify their existence?

Source: MCKinsey Global Insurance Industry Insights
As we have seen in other industries, it is very difficult to turn itself into a digital first company. It may sound cliché but the Innovator Dilemma effect is playing at full when most of your current revenue base depends on traditional distribution / management methods. We are just starting to see the emergence of new digital first carriers, with companies like Oscar leading. Oscar’s mobile experience not only reduces its operational cost but helps redefine the link between carrier, customer and physician and potentially affect risk levels. It also provides a flexible platform that can adapt to emerging new technologies such as wearables.

Oscar’s partnership with Misfit
From a Venture Capital perspective it is an expensive proposition with an important part of capital required for regulatory requirement but taking a longer term view, these balance sheet companies may turn more attractive in a regularised rate environment.
Beyond, if you think of insurance as a class of exotic financial products, is there a possibility for larger scale disintermediation similar to banks and alternative lending possible for carriers and alternative insurance funds.
Big Data
Insurance is in many ways the historical big data business and in trendier places, one might be able to call actuaries data scientists. One of the historical asset of insurance is in its past loss data. However with the exponential growth of sensors in our world new sources of data emerge (see Metromile as well)

Source: KPCB
Additionally companies such as Google, Facebook or Amazon are more likely to have attracted top data talents than traditional carriers. A good example is the success of Climate Corporation (a former Anthemis portfolio company, founded by an ex-Google employee and acquired in 2013 by Monsanto. By leveraging publicly available weather data including the large network of weather stations maintained by NOAA in the US and combining it with a modern big data infrastructure built from the ground up, Climate Corporation was able to provide instant weather insurance quotes.
In the B2B insurance world, for the most part, Lloyds of London still relies heavily on email and excel. When databases exist, they are often siloed from each others and sits in technology that makes live manipulation of data very difficult or impossible. Companies such as Quantemplate (disclosure: I am a non executive director and Anthemis is an investor) bring data efficiency to players that have been struggling with it. The ability to manipulate complex data has the potential to reinforce an algorithmic approach on risk in these markets.
However, perhaps even more than banking, I believe the insurance industry will be facing fundamental challenges in the near future. One way to think about it is perhaps to start again from the definition of insurance itself.
Insurance is a form of risk management primarily used to hedge against the risk of a contingent, uncertain loss. (Wikipedia)
Risk
The combination of an increased number of sensors and computational abilities has the ability to largely impact existing pools of risk. The car industry is a typical example. Statistics tend to show that the human factor a.k.a the driver is the first (by a large percentage — 94% in the US) cause of accidents. Looking further into the statistics the first two reasons are recognition error and decision error for a total of 75%. While fully automated cars may be sligthly further away in the picture, machine assisted driving is on the verge of becoming available in the mass market. Whether via radars or sensors, self braking mechanisms are being deployed by car manufacturers.

To put this in perspective, motor insurance represent about 30% of overall premiums for P&C insurance in Europe. With lower collision risks, premium will be expected to lower as well (and the additional cost of electronics onboard will not compensate for the difference). One of the underlying question is whether with lowered premiums and less variability per driver, the insurance could be embedded in the cost of the vehicle itself. At what point do insurance and guarantee start to look more and more the same?
As software is having more and more impact on our life, the question on risks attached to it, whether digital reputation, or impact of software failure in the real world is becoming more and more important. Will risk shift to software provider away from individuals and traditional companies. For example, should Google or the user be insured for a Google Car?
Contingent
With more and more sensors accompanying us daily and measuring the way we move, eat and feel, is the level of contingency on an individual’s health shifting? There are several experiments by insurance companies in leveraging wearables for prevention in health plans. Oscar is running a specific program with Misfit and Vitality‘s insurance program has a strong focus on prevention. From a strategic point of view it makes sense for insurers to run this type of programs as they might benefit from an indirect self selection process, assuming people wearing wearables are more health conscious than the average population and have less exposure to certain risk (an equivalent of the original Progressive strategy in car insurance).
Alongside sensors the progress in genetic testing (speed and costs as well as the increased ability to run large statistical research) will also ask for a clarification of the role of insurance / and who should provide it (educating myself on this topic so leaving it at that for the moment)
Uncertain
If there is an industry that has no doubt on the reality of climate change, that’s the insurance industry. One of the key topic of the Geneva Association (one of the leading think tank of the insurance industry) is Extreme Event and Climate Risk. For a large part the insurance industry is relying on their historical data to derive their model around risk. However if conditions are changing rapidly, these models have a risk of becoming less relevant. This is forcing the insurance industry to reevaluate the way the work, for example fostering the creation of Open Source models and platforms. The OASIS loss modelling framework, fostered by Climate-KIC and the UK Knowledge Transfer Network, is an example of this type of approach. More generally, the emergence of cross industry data sources, models and the infrastructure to support it bear the promise to massively affect the way the brokerage and insurance industry is operating.
Finally, some of the early models of insurance were based on the sharing of risks and rewards by a community of people (in themutual insurance model, policy holders co-own their insurance company- Benjamin Franklin “launched” this model in the US). In the last years we have seen, via the Internet and mobile now that online communities have reached a scale of unheard scale. Combining the two to reinvent the mutual insurance is therefore bound to happen.
The early players in this field for example Friendsurance and Guevara, have both started from the brokerage spectrum of the industry (as it is a much easier entry point from a regulatory / capital point of view). My way of framing what they do is that it is a form of arbitrage on deductibles. By pooling an equivalent of a low deductible insurance subscription but effectively subscribing to a high deductible insurance product, they are creating a reserve pool of cash for the group to manage first claims. Pool creation and distribution of risk among pools, effective claim management, customer acquisition journey are the type of challenges these models are facing.
The emergence of blockchain / distributed application technologies has the potential to massively increase innovation in this space. A Blockchain based mutual insurance could not only distribute risks and ownership among members but also some of its infrastructure and logic including capital contribution. If you are thinking of doing something in that field, Eris Industries (disclosure: I am a non executive director and Anthemis is an investor) are the people you should talk to!
The Insurance Industry is about to change radically and rapidly, creating a massive opportunity for innovative companies to emerge and improve massively on the way insurance is built, bought and experienced.

GOP congressman says Trumpcare will force people to choose between new iPhone and health insurance
Freedom!
CREDIT: CNN screengrab
During a Tuesday morning appearance on CNN, Rep. Jason Chaffetz (R-UT) suggested that under Trumpcare, Americans will face some tough choices — like buying an iPhone or making sure they can see a doctor.
Pressed by CNN’s Alisyn Camerota about whether he’s concerned Trumpcare’s reduced tax incentives and lack of individual mandate will result in less people having insurance, Chaffetz said, “Well, we’re getting rid of the individual mandate. We’re getting rid of those things that people said that they don’t want.”
6 things you should know about Trumpcare
House Republicans released the long-awaited bill on Monday.thinkprogress.org
“And you know what? Americans have choices, and they’ve gotta make a choice,” he continued. “And so maybe rather than getting that new iPhone that they just love and they want to go spend hundreds of dollars on that, maybe they should invest in their own health care. They’ve gotta make those decisions themselves.”

The cost of a new iPhone 7 without a contract is roughly $700. By comparison, the per-capita cost of health care in the U.S. last year was $10,345. Even when insurance coverage that defrays some of that cost is factored in, Americans still spend way less on phones than they do on health care.

If too many healthy people decide to forego health care they don’t think they’ll need in favor of new phones under Trumpcare, prices will go up for those remaining in the health insurance market, creating a “death spiral.”
Ironically, Chaffetz — chair of the House oversight committee — referenced the “death spiral” phenomenon earlier in the CNN interview.
“We campaigned on this, assured the American people that if you put Republicans in charge, we would fix what is in a death spiral,” Chaffetz said.
Chaffetz — who during a different part of the interview said he plans to investigate President Trump’s (groundless) wiretapping allegations, but has not shown any willingness to investigate Trump’s shady ties with Russia — also applauded the legislative process Republicans plan to use to implement health care reform.
GOP congressman thinks poor people don’t want health care, ‘just like Jesus said’
“There is a group of people that just don’t want health care and aren’t going to take care of themselves.”thinkprogress.org
“Do you know what I really like about it? We’re going to do it in an open and transparent way, unlike what the Democrats did with the Affordable Care Act where they rammed it through,” Chaffetz said.
House committees are actually expected to hold votes on the two Trumpcare bills as early as Wednesday, before the Congressional Budget Office has finished its analysis of how much the bill will cost or how many people will lose insurance coverage. Millions are expected to lose coverage if Trumpcare is passed — a reality acknowledged by Chaffetz in the CNN interview.
“More access, but possibly less coverage? That might be the byproduct?” Camerota asked.
“Well, yes. I think that’s fair,” Chaffetz responded. “But we’re just now consuming this. So, more of the analysis has to happen.”
UPDATE: During a subsequent appearance on Fox News, Chaffetz acknowledged his suggestion that American forego smartphones for health insurance perhaps wasn’t the ideal message for the morning after Trumpcare’s introduction.
“Well, what we’re trying to say, and maybe I didn’t say it as smoothly as I possibly could have but, people need to make a conscious choice. And I believe in self-reliance, and they’re gonna have to make those decisions,” Chaffetz said. “We want people to have access to an affordable health care product — if they have a preexisting condition, if they’re healthy, it is smart to go do it.”

Chaffetz did acknowledge that “we want people to have their communication equipment too,” but said “as an American, you gotta make choices… and as an adult, you get to make those decisions and live by those consequences.”

Insurance Just Got a Lot Sweeter

GC’s enthusiasm for the insurance technology sector is rooted in a belief in the power of insurance as a financial service for smoothing out losses in times of hardship. While the sector accounts for nearly 10% of Fortune 500 companies, the overwhelming majority of incumbents were founded not just pre-internet, but before the advent of modern digital computing. Smartphone ubiquity and continuous connectivity are new laws of nature, providing opportunity to provide consumers and businesses alike with better product experiences that are both long overdue and deserved. This includes changing how companies interact with customers, how policies are priced and purchased, and how claims are submitted and processed.

Our early explorations of the insurance sector led to our Series A investment in Oscar, a modern health insurance carrier driven by the principles of transparency, accessibility, and technology to improve customer satisfaction and drive down the cost of care. Since then, we’ve been active in learning and investing in the insurance sector more broadly, backing Gusto (SMB), TrueMotion (auto) and FreeBird (travel).
Along the way, we’ve had our eyes on the personal property & casualty market. While the auto insurance vertical has strong direct to consumer brands like Geico and Progressive, when it comes to protecting homes and everything inside them, the majority of the $85B in policies sold in the U.S. each year are still done offline by agents — as they’ve been sold for generations.

It was during this exploration that we met Daniel and Shai from Lemonade. And what they showed us was remarkable. For starters, it looks nothing like an insurance product. Instead of filling out forms and speaking on the phone with agents, Lemonade users engage in text-based conversation with “Maya”, an unbelievably quick, responsive, and helpful representative. If you live in NYC, where Lemonade is licensed to sell insurance, you can get your home covered in a matter of minutes. And, the claims process is just as zippy. Unlike the typical insurance experience, you’ll want to tell your friends about it; it is that painless.

As beautiful and magical as Lemonade’s web and mobile products feel, what impressed us more was the company’s rethinking of the economics of insurance under the hood. Insurance claims are made in moments of economic hardship, a time the consumer needs its insurance company the most. Since carriers’ profits are tied to the amount of payouts they make (when pooled premiums in a given year exceed the money the insurance company pays out in claims), tension exists at the heart of this relationship. To help conjure up a new way of doing business, Daniel and Shai recruited renowned behavioral economist, Dan Ariely. Together, they found that the answer lies in community and trust.
Just prior to completing an insurance policy, Lemonade customers identify a charity or cause that they care about. At the end of a given year, Lemonade reviews the claims made by the collective customers behind each cause-affiliated group. If the premiums exceed the claims (which they are expected to do), Lemonade returns what’s left as a “giveback” to the chosen cause. This results in more accurate claims since Lemonade customers are incentivized to help the causes they care about. Consumers act more responsibly, claims expenses are reduced, and more capital is sent to the cause of choice. Instead of making money off of underwriting profits, Lemonade simply takes a flat administrative fee for facilitating the program.
From Lemonade’s blog: “At Lemonade, we’ve designed a different business model. Since we take a 20% flat fee up front for our profits and expenses, whatever we don’t pay out in claims does not get put into the bank. We can’t. It’s not our money. It belongs to the charities and causes our customers choose.”
In an industry as highly regulated as insurance, “new ways of doing business” are not easy to execute. But what struck us deeply about the Lemonade team was that difficulty is a secondary variable in their calculus. Their true north is the customer, accepting the responsibility for finding creative strategies to pull it all off. This meant careful work with regulators, innovative company structuring, hard work in capitalization (both regulatory and operational), opening up new channels for customer acquisition, and more. In unchartered territory, they are not afraid to be the first in blazing a trail and are not phased by pushing the realm of possibility.
We are thrilled to back Daniel and Shai and welcome them and the extended Lemonade team to the GC family.

Trump economic head: Whether millions have insurance is ‘interesting’ but beside the point
National Economic Council Director Gary Cohn says how many people lose health coverage is really only about headlines.
Chris Wallace interviews Gary Cohn CREDIT: Fox News Sunday
Fox News Sunday host Chris Wallace grilled Gary Cohn, the Trump administration’s National Economic Council director, about the millions of people slated to lose their health insurance coverage under the Trumpcare proposal on Sunday. After a lot of dodging, Cohn said the number of people who are insured is “interesting” but beside the point.
Wallace noted the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office (CBO)— which is lead by Congressional Republicans’ handpicked economist — is expected to release an analysis that finds the Trumpcare proposal would mean between “6 and 15 million people” losing their health insurance coverage. “Will the president support a bill that sends millions of Americans off insurance?” Wallace asked.
Trump’s top economic adviser initially ignored the question, criticizing the Affordable Care Act as “not working” and the Congressional Budget Office’s previous scores (under a different director) as “meaningless.” Wallace repeated the question.
“The numbers of who’s covered and who’s not covered,” Cohn replied. “That’s interesting and I know that may make some headlines, but what we care about is people’s ability to get healthcare and people’s ability to go see their doctor.”
Wallace noted that coverage “is really important if you lose it” and showed a 2015 clip of Donald Trump as a candidate vowing to “take care of everybody,” even if it cost him votes.
Cohn answered that under Trumpcare, everyone would be offered coverage. He added that the administration does not think anyone will lose insurance at all, and suggested that the plan’s end of the Medicaid expansion would not actually mean cost anyone their Medicaid coverage. He also claimed that because the people buying insurance on exchanges with subsidies would receive less generous tax credits instead, they will all have the opportunity to buy insurance if they want it.
Watch:

Health and Human Services Secretary Tom Price, who as House Budget Chairman in 2015 selected the head of the CBO, made similar claims Sunday on NBC’s Meet the Press. Price claimed, contrary to all evidence, that “nobody will be worse off financially in the process that we’re going through, understanding that they’ll have choices that they can select the kind of coverage that they want for themselves and for their family, not [that] the government forces them to buy.”

Set this Health Insurance Garbage on Fire
An insider’s calm, moderate response to a crisis
Getting On
Many people who work for a living have the sense that we’re racing to pay our bills or save up for something we need. We blame this “not-enough-ness” on rising expectations, or inflation, or poor spending habits, or the ups and downs of the market; or we bash Millennials, or whatever. But our entire economy has a rock tied to a rope and looped around its throat, and the rock is health insurance.
Health insurance is actually at the core of the growing income inequality in the US. If we don’t make a drastic change, the average family will pay more for their healthcare than their take-home pay by around 2030. I’m not talking about the total cost of your healthcare, I’m talking about the amount taken out of your check plus the amount you pay in co-pays and other hidden fees. Your paycheck: gone.
I’m so glad the market is taking such good care of us.
The Costs
I have been in the position of having to pay more for healthcare than I earned. About 12 years ago, after my son was born and I was in grad school, my paycheck would have completely disappeared if I had bought benefits for us through my employer. I went to the “free market” and found no affordable options there either. Luckily, my family was poor enough that my son and I were able to qualify for the state-provided plan. But many struggling people are too “wealthy” to qualify for many subsidized programs, even if all their money has gone to their health insurance provider. For example, even in states with expanded Medicaid programs, you must make $16,000 or under to qualify for this very low-cost or free coverage.
We may not be able to fathom intellectually how much of our cash goes to healthcare, though we feel it when we go to the ATM or pay bills. The reason why it’s hard to grasp is because health insurance companies intentionally make this so complicated that the only option is to not think about it in order to stay sane. The complexity is part of a larger plan to keep usage down, as is the way we are often denied benefits on the first attempt to get them. If we let ourselves know this, our heads would explode (not a coverable injury under your plan, by the way — sorry).
In our own paychecks, there are several helpful ways that the cost of healthcare is divided off so that we don’t lose our collective minds. We see how much we pay for insurance if we examine our pay stub in detail, but we don’t, because we have so few alternatives or real decisions to make.
For example, on my pay stub, there are separate listings for my dental plan ($11.72 per biweekly pay-period), my Health Savings Account ($166.66 of my money, put into a separate account I use to pay for medical bills, that is supposed to give me a tax benefit and also “train me” to be a wise healthcare consumer, but is actually a huge amount of work to use), health insurance premiums ($228.56), and a vision plan ($8.23). This set-up presents a series of sorta-small numbers, but you never get a big total bill unless you get out the calculator. Per month, I pay a “premium” of $497.02 for family coverage of bodies plus extra for our eyeballs and mouths, or about $5,964.24 per year. That premium is like the baseline before all the extras get added.
Lest you think I’m getting a great deal, rest assured: I have a cheaper plan because it has a much higher deductible, which is the money one has to pay first at the beginning of every year before the insurance kicks in. I always use all the money in my HSA, and then some, which adds a total of another $4,000 to my spending. I’ve got all kinds of stuff wrong with me, plus some prescriptions get dinged for extra charges, so I spend about another $2,000 on supplements and chiropractic care that is “out of network” and outside of my deductible, which doesn’t count for my “in-network” deductible and is under my “out-of-network out-of-pocket maximum.”
It’s a little obtuse, this system of categories, and it costs me at least $11,964.08 per year. It won’t cover my kid’s braces, either.
Granted, it does cover stuff I need to stay alive. But I’m sick of saying “thank you for letting me live” to some company that is making money off of me. Being alive and getting medical care is a right, not a privilege.
The “Choices”
Even if we do examine and add up all the numbers, the horrifying thing is that there is very little we can do to alter our options within this system because our choices are rigged.
The first thing every HR person tells you is to be a smart shopper. You could weigh two options offered by your employer, if you’re lucky enough to have a job and then have insurance offered through your employer. And you should calculate all the costs and benefits. Here’s one good guide for comparing your health plans from Consumer Reports.
But it doesn’t matter much which choice you make, because across the board, employers are cutting options, changing plans to make them “less rich,” squeezing out benefits, narrowing provider networks, and passing more and more of the financial risk onto their employees. Much of the cost you pay for healthcare doesn’t actually show up on your pay stub but is instead taken from you in dribs and drabs as your deductibles get higher and your co-pays for office visits slowly balloon, at a rate that is more rapid than the total cost of healthcare over time. Our employers tell us this will help us learn to control costs, as if it’s our fault this system is such crap.
It’s not.
The Committees
I served on a committee for the last two years at my job, and this committee’s task was, in part, to negotiate benefits with my employer. I learned exactly how the game is rigged.
We asked to see all kinds of plan options, and at every turn, our employer consulted the experts, who assured us that “consumer-driven healthcare” and higher deductibles were the only way to bring down healthcare costs. During the previous year, changes to our plan — including having employees bear more of the cost but also including benefits education and cheap measures that made our employees healthier rather than just guilty, depressed, and confused — had actually resulted in a decreased overall cost to our employer.
Those big “wins” became irrelevant as soon as they were achieved. We asked to freeze healthcare premiums for a year while we investigated what had worked, and we were told no: healthcare was in crisis, and the only way forward was to take the next recommendation from the consultants.
What we learned is that there’s no such thing as a real “market” for plans, because employees themselves, even in a rare situation like ours where we potentially had access to conversations and data, don’t make the decisions about which plan to buy. Instead, our options shrink. Employers hear from healthcare consultants that Plan A or Plan B is the “best new way to contain healthcare costs,” and employers do whatever the consultants tell them. These consultants work at the behest and pleasure of the insurers.
What’s more, many of the options touted as healthcare trends are overly political. We were sent forwarded emails and newsletters from “free enterprise” institutes proclaiming that yet more draconian options like “private exchanges” which are supposed to be the ultimate dream in for-profit healthcare: your employer just gives you a lump sum of money, and you worry about how to pay for your own care. We worried that these exchanges didn’t have any data or real plans to back them up, and yet we had to listen to a presentation from our healthcare consultants assuring us that this was the next (unstoppable!) market-based solution to healthcare.
Healthcare costs are going to continue to rise, for a variety of complex reasons. Yet we were told that it was all the consumers’ fault, which is a classic blame-the-victim strategy. After leaving every single one of those benefits meetings, I felt unaccountably guilty for being mortal and having a body. The emergency of healthcare costs was all placed on the consumer in a very shame-based way; the story of healthcare is told in these meetings in terms of the supposedly poor choices of the healthcare consumer and their “overuse” of the system. Such “overuse” might exist, but the individual consumer gets no guidance about how to use their plan effectively.
Overall, the consumer is not to blame. The fact that the system continues to fail to control costs is an indication of its poor design. Here are some of the factors at fault.
Bad incentives. At every level, there is little incentive for providers to control costs. Providers work in a “fee-for-service” system that reimburses based on the quantity of care, which results in patterns of more expensive testing being done. Our care for complex diseases is poorly coordinated, resulting in duplication of testing. And preventative care for chronic diseases is hard to come by. Many health insurers operate as for-profit businesses, which makes them responsible not for providing care but for targeting consumers and designing plans that will result in a healthy profit margin. UnitedHealth, the nation’s largest insurer in 2014, made $10.3 billion in profits that year. Health insurance companies look to target the most profitable large accounts, so they engage in a process of “purging” unprofitable smaller accounts by raising fees. This means that, even under the ACA, many small businesses cannot afford to buy insurance for their employees.
Lack of competition. Now the bigger insurers have accumulated enough money to start buying up smaller firms, too. They eliminate their own competition, and that consolidation also has the effect of decreasing insurers’ incentives for lowering prices.
Prescription drugs. Insurers say that they need more and more money to function due to the rising cost of healthcare and specifically the escalating cost of prescription drugs. Indeed, the pharmaceutical industry’s influence over healthcare costs and even healthcare legislation is hotly contested (and scary). But the entire problem can’t be blamed on Big Pharma.
Insufficient government regulation. As a result of concerns over price gouging — insurers have a very captive market, after all — Congress instituted limits on price increases under the Affordable Care Act. An insurer gets fined if it doesn’t spend 80% of what it collects on costs related to providing actual medical care. (This is called the 80/20 rule.) But the limits aren’t sufficient. Since before the ACA went into effect, industry analysts predicted that the five major health insurance companies stood to profit immensely from the ACA thanks to new users that are driven to buy their plans, hikes in premiums for small businesses that are required to insure their employees, and the high ceiling on rate hikes.
Consultants. During my term on the committee at my workplace, we examined plan options and consultant reports. I learned the vocabulary and tried to talk back, to explain, in plain language, the effects of escalating healthcare costs on my family. Many of the proposals would have resulted in my earning less next year than I made this year. And in the end, we won a one-year reprieve on healthcare changes. But in the process, we saw the horizon for us: inevitable cuts and more extreme “market-based” approaches guaranteed to shift more and more of the costs to the employees over time.
I’ve been active in healthcare for a long time. I wrote a memoir about my efforts. In August, I’m headed up to the Connecticut State House to testify in a hearing, because my insurer, Aetna, has asked the state if it can raise its consumers’ rates an average of 27% next year. I’m not sure what my workplace’s rates would be, or whether this average includes my workplace, but it’s much too high in any case. For perspective, my raise for next year is estimated to be around 1.5%.
The fundamental problem is that healthcare does not work as a market. The way things are set up now, stockholders of for-profit insurance firms and pharmaceutical firms benefit from the wild escalation in healthcare costs, so I’m calling bullshit on their “concern” over the escalation.
A meaningful healthcare fix will have to be structural, not an effort to shame those who have, and use, benefits.
The Alternative
Healthcare “industry” experts say voters won’t consent to pay for a public system, but in 2016 the average family of four spends over $25,000 of their own money per year on healthcare. I would gladly continue to fork over that cash if it would go to something decent, like bricks for hospital walls or salaries for nurses. Anybody who complains that we shouldn’t switch away from a market-driven system because it’s too hard or would be too complicated has never actually lived in a human body with an illness on a limited income and with substandard insurance. Let the people who have been fighting for socialized medicine run the new system if the buffoons currently in charge aren’t sure how to begin.
We’re all getting sicker, too, because this shit causes stress and forces low-income people to avoid caring for chronic problems. We avoid medical care when the costs seem greater than the benefits.
And no, the Affordable Care Act sadly didn’t fix this, though I’m a fan of that legislation. What it did was begin to offer health insurance options for people whose coverage was unfairly much too expensive before. But it didn’t wipe the slate clean and start over. That is what we need to do.
Though there was huge support for Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders’ “Medicare for all” campaign platform, the Democratic National Committee didn’t include that wording in their campaign platform. I hope whatever organization Sanders has promised to launch will continue to make noise, and anybody with a body who isn’t a pharma or insurance shareholder should sign on. At the personal level, right now, all we can do is to tell our friends that this is one game they shouldn’t feel guilty about losing — because we’re getting bled out.
I’ll be sitting in one of those ACA hearings next month, feeling all my medical issues aggravated by the stress of living under this current system, which taxes all of our bodies and minds in ways that are never figured into the cost/benefit equations. I’m eager to tell my insurer that if it needs a 27% rate increase in order to function, maybe it should consider getting out of this business and letting somebody else take over.
Sonya Huber is the author of 5 books, including The Evolution of Hillary Clinton (June 2016) and the forthcoming Pain Woman Takes Your Keys. You can follow her on Twitter at @sonyahuber and read more at sonyahuber.com.

Demonetizing Insurance
Massive reductions in insurance costs are coming, along with a wave of disruption.
Traditionally, insurance premiums are determined by actuaries… a function of big numbers, statistics and probabilities.
That’s what you have to do when you don’t know what’s really going on.
You hope that the pool of insured individuals is big enough to account for the variation in your predictive model.
But exponential technologies — namely computation/digitization, artificial intelligence, machine learning, sensors, networks (especially social networks), and genomics — will change all of that.
This is a blog about the future of insurance…
Let’s dive in.
Disrupting Insurance
I have been advising and am a proud board member of a new company called Lemonade Insurance Company that is rebuilding the insurance model from the bottom up — it is the world’s first “peer-to-peer” (P2P) insurance company.
Imagine just 90 seconds to get insured, 3 minutes to get paid. Zero paperwork.
P2P reverses the traditional insurance model. They treat the premiums you pay as if it’s your money. With P2P, everything becomes simple and transparent. Lemonade takes a flat fee, pays claims really fast, and gives back what’s left to causes you care about.
This week Lemonade launched their service and announced that they’ve been licensed as a full-stack insurance carrier by New York State for homeowner and renter’s insurance.
The work they’ve been doing is brilliant, so I’ll be using them as a strong example of some of the following ideas.
Let’s talk about five exponential drivers of this upcoming insurance revolution…
1. Digitization
Fraud consumes as much as 38% of all the money in the traditional insurance system, inflating premiums by $1,300 and making the claims process protracted and unpleasant.
This happens because there is a lack of transparency in a largely analog (rather than digital) system with many humans in the loop.
If you could digitize the entire process — from signing up to submitting a claim — and give the insured individual full transparency over the status of their request, adding in automation and machine learning, you can dramatically reduce processing time and costs.
This is what Lemonade does at its core. “Technology drives everything at Lemonade,” said Shai Wininger, president and cofounder. “From signing up to submitting a claim, the entire experience is mobile, simple and remarkably fast. What used to take weeks or months now happens in minutes or seconds. It’s what you get when you replace brokers and paperwork with bots and machine learning. Zero paperwork and instant everything.”
2. Implications of Social Networks
Social networks will allow us to create true peer-to-peer insurance models.
Imagine finding a group of peers, who you trust and can vouch for, and coming together as a group to self-insure.
You skip the centralized, expensive middleman insurance carrier — instead, a technology stack (app, database, AI-bot) manages a decentralized network of people who pay premiums and file claims that the group approves.
This takes out an enormous percentage of the cost structure of traditional insurance. Instead of paying fees and insurance company salaries, your peer group will be able to decide what to do with the extra cash that wasn’t paid out.
At Lemonade, you actually have the option to donate underwriting profits to nonprofit organizations of your choosing. Their hope is to remake insurance as a social good, rather than a necessary evil.
3. Implications of Genomics
When talking about life insurance, it’s going to be difficult to ignore genomic data. Your DNA is your medical future. It’s predictive of what’s likely to inflict or kill you.
In 2008, a federal law called the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA) was passed to protect people from genetic discrimination in healthinsurance and employment. The law states, “Genetic discrimination is the misuse of genetic information.”
However, life insurance companies are exempt from GINA.
I imagine that, soon, groups with great genes will coalesce and self-insure.
It’s in their best interest to do so. You’ll be able to upload your genomics data and find others in your peer group that have similar or better risk profiles than you do…
For life insurance companies, I believe there is a beautiful alignment of incentives coming soon. These life insurance companies will use genomics information to help their clients stay alive longer.
Why? Because the longer they are alive, the more premiums they can pay…
4. Implications of Sensors
Sensors will allow insurance policies to be based on actual data (e.g. usage, health), rather than general heuristics and rules.
As an analogy, check out Progressive Insurance’s SNAPSHOT Automotive Sensor package — it’s a sensor you put in your car that tracks how well you drive. (Do you brake hard? Speed? Take high-speed turns?)
When your insurance policy is based on how you actually drive, rather than just your age, gender and what kind of car you own, safer drivers win.
Sensors will have the biggest impact on health insurance, as hundreds of new health sensors are coming to market in the next 5–10 years.
Sensors tracking healthy behavior such as how much you exercise andwhat you eat, will get you low insurance costs.
A number of health insurance companies are already using health sensors in their policies.
One notable company called Oscar uses technology to simplify the entire health insurance experience.
You can use their app to talk to a doctor and get prescriptions without leaving home.
They built an app that helps you keep track of your health history with a timeline and you can earn rewards for staying active with a free Misfit step tracker.
In the near future, with the peer-to-peer model, you’ll soon upload everything from what you eat to the number of steps you take per day, and find a group with similar health profiles and self-insure.
5. Implications of A.I. & Sensors
The car insurance industry is about to get disrupted in a huge way.
Every major car company is working on full or partial autonomy, and since these cars are projected to reduce accidents by up to 90%, these cars are the beginning of the end for car insurance.
On top of that, why would I need a car insurance policy if I never drive? Or if I don’t own a car?
Accounting firm KPMG predicts that the motor insurance market may shrink by 60% by 2040. I think that number is a serious underestimate.
There is certainly a looming legislative battle coming for auto industry and auto insurance stakeholders. Does liability fall on car manufacturers? “Drivers”? Software engineers? AI’s? It remains to be seen.
Whatever the case may be, insurance, across the board, is ripe for disruption.
Join Me
This is the sort of conversation we explore at my 250-person executive mastermind group called Abundance 360.
The program is highly selective. If you’d like to be considered, apply here. Share this with your friends, especially if they are interested in any of the areas outlined above.
P.S. Every week I send out a “Tech Blog” like this one. If you want to sign up, go to Diamandis.com and sign up for this and Abundance Insider.
P.P.S. My dear friend Dan Sullivan and I have a podcast called Exponential Wisdom. Our conversations focus on the exponential technologies creating abundance, the human-technology collaboration, and entrepreneurship. Head here to listen and subscribe: a360.com/podcast

Photo: NASA, Goddard, Chris Gunn
If You Want Life Insurance, Think Twice Before Getting A Genetic Test
As genetic testing explodes, health insurers are banned from denying coverage based on results. The same doesn’t apply for life insurance.
BY CHRISTINA FARR
Jennifer Marie* should be an ideal candidate for life insurance: She’s 36, gainfully employed, and has no current medical issues.
But on September 15 last year, Jennifer Marie’s application for life insurance was denied.
“Unfortunately after carefully reviewing your application, we regret that we are unable to provide you with coverage because of your positive BRCA 1 gene,” the letter reads. In the U.S., about one in 400 women have a BRCA 1 or 2 gene, which is associated with increased risk of breast and ovarian cancer.
Jennifer Marie provided a copy of the document to Fast Company on the condition that she and her insurance company remain anonymous, as she is still hoping to appeal the rejection.

According to recent estimates, 55% to 65% of women who inherit a harmful BRCA 1 mutation will develop breast cancer by the age of 70. By contrast, 12% of the general population will be diagnosed with breast cancer. But the presence of the gene mutation is by no means a death sentence. Not everyone with the BRCA mutation develops cancer, and some informed patients seek highly effective preventative treatments to reduce the likelihood that they’ll ever get sick.
“Those who find out they have the mutation can drastically reduce their risk,” says Laura Esserman, a surgeon and breast cancer oncology specialist at UC San Francisco. “Knowledge is power.”
Continue reading here.

Artificial Intelligence Verticals (I): Insurance
I wrote a short piece some time ago on how AI is going to affect the insurance industry. Now I want to dig a bit more into that.
Image Credit: Omelchenko/Shutterstock
I. A bit of background
The insurance sector is one of the most old-fashioned and resistant-to-change space, and this is why AI will have a greater impact on that with respect to more receptive industries. The collection of data of new types (i.e., unstructured data such as reports, images, contracts, etc.) and the use of new algorithms are disrupting the sector in several ways.
Traditionally, an insurance company followed this type of process:
Identifying pool of customers whom might be risk-assessed;
Targeting those customers and assessing the risk for each class;
Selling differently priced policies spreading the risks over the pool of customers;
Try to retain those customers as long as possible offering lower price for longer contracts.
This is a really simplistic representation of the insurance business in the last fifty years, and I am aware that insurance experts might disagree with me in many different ways. There are a couple of further features to be pointed out: first of all, insurance has historically been sold not bought, which means that brokers and agents were essential to tracking new customers and to even retain old ones. In addition, it is an industry which is by definition rich of data because they collected anything they could, but is also one of the less advanced because either many of those data are unstructured or semi-structured, or the model used are quite old and simple.
Most of those data were easy to obtain because they were required to correctly price the coverage, while additional complimentary data were provided only by good customers who had incentives in providing as much data as possible to get a cheaper policy. Of course, this works the other way for bad customers, and this is a perspective on the phenomenon of “adverse selection” (i.e., bad customers are going to ask an insurance because they feel they will need it).
The adverse selection issue is though only one of the intrinsic challenges of the sector: strong regulation, high level of fraud attempts, and complexity are other features any incumbents should take care of. It is interesting to notice though that some of those are also specific barriers to entry for startups: they might attract indeed people who normally can get affordable insurance with a bigger competitor (adverse selection) and they usually have the capabilities for breaking down the risk complexity but not to support the funding need for risk coverages (so they need to work with incumbents rather than trying to replace them).
In spite of those problems, in the last decade, we noticed a new trend emerging. Insurances, in the effort of trying to reduce moral hazard problems, they started offering premium discounts to their final customers in order to get extra information. This occurred either through a questionnaire (asking directly the customer for further data in exchange for a lower price) or indirectly through devices (healthy devices, black boxes, etc.). The real issue though has been the engagement side of this proposal, because of the opposite nature of information, rewards, and human nature. The rewards offered were indeed either temporary or provided only once and people got lazy very quickly, while the information stream needed to be constant.
The following step has been the introduction of apps to let customers monitor by themselves their own data and behavior, sometimes even given away for free the device itself. Leaving the customer with full power on his data had though an inverse effect, because people did not have the motivation in tracking down their improvements, and they got upset at the same time because they felt they were not getting the most out of that opportunity.
Regardless of the specific innovative way in which insurers engaged customers, the process used in the insurance business did not change much in the past century. Expert systems and knowledge engineering dominated the sector setting the rules to be followed in internal workflows, but this is slowly changing with intelligent automation systems. We are actually migrating from rule-based decision systems to statistical learning and eventually machine learning.
Image Credit: http://www.creativityatwork.com/2014/06/10/busy-innovate/
II. So how can AI help the insurance industry?
AI is helping (or disrupting, depending on how you see the matter) the sector in different ways. First of all, it can help increasing the customer engagement and retention problem which has been just mentioned. The abundance of data can be used indeed to refine the customers’ segmentation and provide personalized offers based on personal features. It also helps in reducing the costs through smart automatization or RPA (robotic process automation).
Second, AI is making people more aware of the risks as well as habits, and it is driving them toward better behaviors.
Furthermore, the better pricing and risk assessment that AI is introducing analyzing more granular data will make some people uninsurable (i.e., too risky to be fairly priced and covered) as well as to turn back some previously uninsurable people into insurable customers again. The governments or central regulatory agencies should then start thinking about a “pricing/risk threshold” in which they intervene subsidizing the cost of relevant insurances (e.g., basic health coverage) in order to “guarantee the uninsurables”.
Finally, it might be useful to think in terms of what an insurable risk is in order to see how AI can help with that.
According to Jin Park (Assistant Professor at IWU), an insurable risk is identifiable through the following five conditions:
Large number of similar exposure units (mutuality);
Accidental and unintentional loss (not predictable and independent from the insured customers);
Determinable and measurable loss;
Calculable chance of (not catastrophic/systemic) loss;
Economically feasible premium.
AI is going to affect all those features: with a better and more detailed customer profiling, we won’t need indeed to have such a large base of insured units. It will turn some frequent events into accidental (e.g., affecting drivers’ behavior it will reduce the basic accidents into rare events) and it will improve our ability to forecast and compute both the probability and magnitude potential losses even in those cases too hard to be managed before. All the previous improvements will make many more premium under budgets, and therefore the conclusion is that AI will “lower” the threshold of what we consider nowadays an insurable risk, and it will make then more risks insurable.
Image Credit: iStock
III. Who are the sector innovators?
There are plenty of startups out there working at the intersection of AI and insurance, and it essential to look at least at some of them to understand the future direction of the industry, as well as the kind of improvements AI is having in the insurtech space. An interesting thing to notice is that most of the innovation is happening in the UK rather than other countries, in all the segments proposed below.
Claim processing: Shift Technology skims the valid claims from the ones that deserve further validations; Tractable instead is trying to automatize experts task for insurances; ControlExpert has a specific focus on car claims; Cognotekt optimizes internal business processes, as well as Snapsheet does; Motionscloud offers instead mobile claim management solutions; and finally RightIndem aims to help insurers to deliver on-premise smoothing the claiming flow.
Virtual Agents & Chatbots: Spixii is an automated insurance agent who helps you buying any insurance coverage you might want; Cognicor is a virtual assistant that offers customer care services; Conversica identifies which leads intend to purchase, while Your.MD is a personal health assistant that analyzes symptoms and produces pieces of advice. MedWhat instead uses EMR (medical records) to assist the patient as it was a virtual doctor, and Babylon gives medical advice taking care of tight budget constraints. Insurify is another personal insurance agent who works as a comparator for car insurances.
What today is called simply chatbot is going to be renamed in a few years robo-insurer. There are already few examples of companies toward that goal: Risk Genius is indeed an intelligent comparator which identifies gaps in coverage for the customer and PolicyGenius looks for the best solution that fits customer’s needs and characteristics, while Drive Spotter implements real-time video analytics to keep drivers safe(r). More generally, robo-insurers will be a quite wide class of agents who will end up providing different services, all of them with the final goal of helping the clients to undertake risk-mitigating actions and only cover the real (residual) risks.
Customers engagement: Oscar is probably the most successful insurtech company out there, with the final goal of making insurance simple and accessible to everyone through a great UX. Similar to Oscar is somehow Stride Health, while Brolly is a tool that helps customers in understanding their own needs and facilitates in one place all the insurance coverages in place, in a similar fashion to Knip. Adtelligence instead creates personalized offers and relevant products based on customer’s characteristics. Captricity uses machine learning to convert handwritten files into structured data, and this can be used to better understand the final customer. Finally, ValChoice ranks the service of insurers to the benefit of the client.
Telematics: connected cars and telematics is a pretty big area itself (see CBinsights article to know more about it), but it would be worthy to point out the work that Greenroad, Vnomics, and Telogis are doing in capturing driving behaviors and habits as well as computing fuel efficiency. Cambridge Mobile Telematics works similarly, although it uses smartphone data and mobile devices habits. Navdy is trying to revolutionizing the UI/UX within vehicles, displaying information in such a way that the driver does not get distracted. Lytx uses vision technology to provide real-time feedbacks to the driver.
Underwriting: AI can be (and actually is) used to spot out hidden correlations to granularly segment customers and risks in a more efficient way. Even though it might in theory possible to identify some algos that could perform better than others (see the work Wipro did for fraud detection), data always come first, at least for the next close future. Many companies operate in the space, as for instance Carpe Data that provides predictive algorithms and data products for property and casualty and life insurances through the analysis of public data (e.g., social media data). Atidot created a machine learning risk management platform, while Tyche uses unstructured data to optimize the underwriting and claims process. Big Cloud Analytics collects data from wearables and formulates health scores for a better risk assessment, while Cape Analytics uses computer vision techniques on geospatial data to improve the level of detail on current houses conditions. Dreamquark creates a more accurate representation of the medical datasets to be used for underwriting purposes by insurances, similarly to FitSense that offers also apps products. Melody Health Insurance provides also low-cost insurances, while Uvamo uses AI to assess the risk of policy applications. A more accurate underwriting can even translate into covering events that are today quite risky (e.g., as MeteoProtect and Praedicat, and are doing for weather risk management).
Finally, on a side, it is worthy to point out to pure technological enablers as Instanda, which offers a management tool to the insurance providers to manage effectively and timely new products launched; Insly, a cloud-based platform for insurance brokers; and finally, SimpleInsurance is instead an e-commerce provider for product insurances.
P2P insurance: Lemonade, Friendsurance, and Guevara are peer-to-peer insurance startups focusing respectively on property and casualty insurance the first two, and car insurance the latter one.
Insurchain & Smart Contracts: these are companies in the insurance sector that are driven by blockchain technology. Elliptic offers real-time AML for bitcoin specifically, while Everledger is a permanent immutable ledger for diamond certification. Luther Systems is instead a stealth-mode company working on the standardization of smart contracts. Dynamis provides a P2P supplementary unemployment insurance product, while Saldo.mx provides micro-insurance policies on the blockchain. SafeShare covers multiple parties with insurance cover at short notice and for varying periods, and finally, Teambrella is another P2P insurance platform run on the blockchain.
Insurance on-demand: this class of startups put in customers’ hand the entire insurance buying process. Trov is probably the best example of this new class of players and it allows to ensure things by simply taking a picture of them. Cuvva is quite similar but with a focus on car insurance, Sure and Airsurety on travel policies, and Back me up is another example of on-demand insurance. But this class does not include only the proper on-demand business model, but also insurance startups which provide products that vary by location, time, use, or customer. In other words, pay-per-mile business model (Metromile), micro-insurance policies (Neosurance), or eventually Insurance-as-a-service models (Digital Risks).
IV. Concluding Thoughts
Yan identifies four elements which constitute the insurance profit structure: premium earned and the investment income from one hand, and underwriting cost and claim expenses from the other. AI is and will be able to improve the cost structure, increasing at the same time the competitiveness and enlarging the customer base accessible to insurers, while optimizing internal processes and enhancing the transparency and robustness of the compliance flow.
The greatest challenge I still see in insurance is the cultural mindset which might prevent insurance to adopt early AI solutions, although this won’t probably have a long life given the incredible pressure to innovate the insurance providers are undergoing through.
— —
Follow me on Medium
Look at my other articles on AI and Machine Learning:
Artificial Intelligence Classification Matrix
A categorization and analytical tool for AI startupsmedium.com
What you are too afraid to ask about Artificial Intelligence (Part I): Machine Learning
This is the first of three parts on recent developments in AImedium.com
Who is best positioned to invest in Artificial Intelligence? A descriptive analysis
A landscape analysis of AI startupsmedium.com

5 Ways That Insurance Will Be Disrupted By The Blockchain

I have been thinking a lot about how the Blockchain will disrupt different aspects of the economy and was recently asked about how it might impact the insurance space. My answer is that the Blockchain is about to enable the next generation of insurance.
There are a lot of interesting innovations in the space: Crowdfunding insurance, P2P insurance, On-demand insurance. We are excited about the fourth innovation in the space which is how the blockchain helps push insurance forward. I got input from a few of our companies on how they feel this will play out and this is what was discussed. So thank you Karen Hsu of BlockCypher and Hannah Kim of Mifiel.
“Smart contracts powered by the Blockchain could provide customers and insurers with the means to manage claims in a transparent, responsive and irrefutable manner.” — Deloitte’s Blockchain Report
The Blockchain was intended to do one thing: replace third party trust with mathematical proof. This process of replacing trust, ends up being very valuable, especially when thinking globally.
1. Reduce Fraud and Liability associated with immediate payments
Immutable ledgers are great for reducing fraud risk, and specifically for immediate payments, whether for claims or other, will be a huge value add to the industry.
2. Digital Claims Management (Track status of claims real time)
Imagine being able to verify the status of a claim in real time. The insurance companies would not have to put that information in an exposed database. This would be very valuable for hospitals, the police and other third parties who might need to look up information.
3. Automate payments with smart contracts
Reduce liability by automating claims with smart contracts, I think that this concept is far out, because smart contracts are still in the nascent stages, but it could be incredibly powerful.
4. Digital Wallets and identity management
A lot of people bring up identity management as a huge opportunity. The ability to prove someone is who they say they are online, but in the insurance world this could be a huge financial incentive to make it work. Their can be more accurate risk assessments and less fraudulent claims.
5. Cyber Liability
No corporation wants to get Edward Snowden(ed). He was able to modify the internal records to disguise what he was doing. With an immutable record of logs, the ability to change the record becomes impossible. Real time auditing can remove any cyber liability.
And many more…

Trumpcare could cost 24 million people their insurance, government analysis finds
The Congressional Budget Office just released its much anticipated report. Republicans were right to be scared.
House Speaker Paul Ryan (R-WI) speaks during a news conference at the Republican National Committee Headquarters on Capitol Hill in Washington, Wednesday, March 8, 2017. CREDIT: AP/J. Scott Applewhite
The Congressional Budget Office released its long awaited analysis of Trumpcare on Monday afternoon, and its findings were grim.
The CBO found that 14 million fewer Americans would be insured by 2018 under the House GOP’s health care plan. By 2026, a full 24 million people would have gone uninsured relative to the number of people expected to be insured under the Affordable Care Act. The increase stems mostly from Trumpcare’s repeal of the individual mandate and changes to Medicaid.
The House GOP’s plan would get rid of the individual mandate that requires all Americans to sign up for health insurance, and would instead introduce a provision requiring continuous coverage. If anyone tries to go without insurance for two months or more, they would be required to pay 30 percent more on their premiums once they resumed coverage. Health care experts say this won’t be enough to keep healthy people in the market.
These are the people who will suffer under Trumpcare
Women, low-income people, and the elderly will all feel the effects of the American Healthcare Act.thinkprogress.org
The plan would also phase out Medicaid expansion and restructure how the program is funded. Health care experts also say they are concerned that tax credits won’t benefit low-income people the way they did under the ACA, and that things like health savings accounts won’t be enough to help the Americans who need help the most. Overall, low-income people, women, people with chronic illnesses, and people with mental health issues would suffer the most under this plan.
The CBO also projected that premiums would be 15 to 20 percent higher overall in 2018 and 2019. The cost would start to decline in 2020, but older enrollees would still pay substantially higher premiums than young people, because insurers would be permitted to charge then five times as much. Under the ACA, insurers can only charge older people up to three times more than younger people.
Republicans on the Hill and in the Trump administration, perhaps anticipating a report with these findings, started casting doubt on the CBO’s accuracy well before Monday’s report came out.
“So I love the folks at the CBO, they work really hard, they do, but sometimes we ask them to do stuff they’re not capable of doing, and estimating the impact of a bill this size isn’t the — isn’t the best use of their time,” Mick Mulvaney, President Donald Trump’s director of the Office of Management and Budget, told ABC News on Sunday.
The CBO estimated that enacting Trumpcare would reduce the federal deficit by $337 billion over the 2017–2026 period. There would be a $1.2 trillion reduction in outlays, with the largest savings coming from changes to Medicaid and the elimination of the ACA’s subsidies for non-group health insurance. There would a reduction of $880 billion in federal outlays for Medicaid.

Lessons From the Front Lines of Insurance Tech Innovation in China
Co-authored by Ankur Nandwani and Christopher Kelvin Lee

“A healthy society should not be full of stock investors, but policyholders.” — Jack Ma
Hoopla around insurance technology in the U.S. is heating up as startups look to re-imagine how insurance is bought, productized, and experienced across small commercial, life, personal property coverage, and more. Still, the insurance tech space as a whole is at an early stage and a host of exciting startup innovation either remains under wraps or is just now getting off the ground. 
 
Meanwhile, activity in China to date has proven to be incredibly dynamic. Familiar macro-conditions, such as 1.4 billion citizens, 700 million+ Internet users, and massive distribution effects driven by WeChat and Alipay are at play, but China also features a few factors ultimately leading to a more exciting environment for insurance innovation. This includes:
 
A generally supportive regulatory environment (so far): The China Insurance Regulatory Commission (CIRC) has been aggressive to both acknowledge and encourage innovation around new insurance products and online distribution on a national level at least so far, while barriers to entry in the U.S. are controlled by state insurance commissioners, which are appointed by the new governor coming into office in 39 out of 50 states. 
 
A massively underserved market opportunity. While China is set to advance past Japan as the world’s second largest insurance market with a rapidly growing segment of online insurance buying, overall insurance penetration in China ranks just 49th among nations and 18 times lower than penetration in the U.S. as measured by premium vs. GDP. This is a significant mismatch as the U.S. GDP per capita is only 4 times greater than China. Ultimately, U.S. players have to deal with saturation and struggle to find an edge in the value chain; whereas in China, both domestic insurance carriers and new startup insurers encounter greenfield opportunities to find growth and profitability at scale.
 
A leading role by Internet giants. Third, the largest Internet companies in China — Baidu, Alibaba, Tencent and Jingdong (BATJ) — are all aggressively staking out their place in how the country’s digital insurance landscape will shake out — in contrast with the unsubstantial role Facebook, Google and Amazon have taken to date in the U.S. The unique distribution and data advantages of these major players could help to rapidly accelerate the growth of the overall industry in China and shift the landscape as they or their financial services affiliates launch licensed online insurers across product lines.
We organize this overview into the following parts:
Insurance Regulation and Market Conditions in China
Zhong An: The World’s First Dominant Online Insurer
Lessons through Product Walkthroughs
Key Takeaways & Open Questions
1. Insurance Regulation and Market Conditions in China
Regulators seem keen on the opportunities of insurance tech innovation in China (for now)
 
Chinese insurance regulators, namely CIRC, are aware of the rise of digital insurance in China. More importantly, a number of early developments suggest that regulators are also meaningfully supportive of how technology will influence the growth of insurance in China. Some of these developments include:
 
 More online insurance carrier licenses 
 
Last July, CIRC approved licenses for three additional online insurers, Yi An Property Insurance, Anxin Property Insurance, and Taikang Online Property Insurance, with products including investment-linked insurance (Taikang), medical expense insurance (Yi An) and online payment insurance (Anxin). As one source close to CIRC said on the approvals, “The approvals given one after another by CIRC to three Internet insurance companies is line with the overall government drive to promote Internet business, which is developing very rapidly.” 
 
That’s not to say that regulators won’t change their tone toward nascent online insurers or haven’t done so already. It’s quite possible that the influx of new online-only licenses by CIRC was a one-time phenomenon or a rare instance of leniency. Many more are waiting. One Chinese insurance executive told us there are more than 200 companies including new online insurers waiting in the queue for a license as of August.

The first set of online insurance regulations enabling scale 
 
In the same month, CIRC released its first set of “Internet Insurance Measures”, which took effect in October 2015 to regulate emerging online insurance businesses in China. We won’t re-iterate the full list here, but the new regulation stipulates that insurance firms may provide online insurance services in locations where they do not have physical presence, which allows new insurance products enabled for the Internet economy to launch nationwide soon after CIRC filing. Worth noting that this does not apply to mature insurance products in China including auto insurance, which requires provincial regulatory approval.
 
Chinese insurers being driven closer to startups
 
Those in the U.S. and Europe involved in the insurance tech ecosystem might be familiar with three-year old Zhong An Insurance, whose four billion policies sold can prompt shock and awe. But it’s important to mention that market share in both life and P&C in China are dominated by the largest domestic players. In 2014, the top 3 life insurers accounted for nearly half of all life insurance premium income in China; in total, the top 10 life insurers accounted for nearly 82% market share. Within P&C, market concentration has increased even further. The top 5 non-life insurance companies accounted for a whopping 75% of premium income in 2014, while the top 10 made up 86% market share.

And as U.S. and Europe-based insurers have, those same domestic insurers may soon becoming more active across the startup landscape. According to a statement coming after a cabinet meeting led by Li Keqiang in September 2016, state-owned companies, which include insurers like China Taiping and China Life, will be allowed to set up venture funds and “insurance companies will be encouraged to invest in startups.”
 
Chinese insurers and other strategics have already been involved in the financing of insurance startups globally; notably, U.S. per-mile car insurance startup Metromile recently disclosed a $50M investment from China Pacific Insurance Group and Fosun, the owner of Yong’an P&C Insurance in China, recently made an investment in mobile insurance claims company Snapsheet. We can expect to see more tech or online insurance-focused investments or joint ventures by Chinese insurers both domestically and abroad.
 
Still early days
 
Of course, it would be remiss to ignore that regulation around insurance innovation in China is still incredibly nascent — and may eventually play out significantly differently than the current environment. Consider that online insurance sales platform Datebao.com became the first Internet insurance startup to receive a national broker license in only November of last year.
 
We can look to prior regulation for guidance. In 2014, for example, China’s banking and insurance regulators released stringent bancassurance guidelines and earlier this year, an overhaul of the fund management industry resulted in a culling of 10,000+ private fund managers. In China, startups and online insurers that are able to grow into massive scale will always face the possibility of regulators taking a more draconian approach.
 
China’s Internet giants have had mixed success (and strategies) on the regulatory front to date. Bai An Insurance, the joint venture of Baidu, Hillhouse Capital and Allianz, was announced with much fanfare in November 2015, but has yet to receive full approval by CIRC likely due in part to negative press regarding the role of Baidu ads in a student’s death from cancer. Meanwhile, Ant Financial decided a faster route to obtaining a license would be to acquire an existing Chinese insurer (Cathay), which it did in September 2015.
 
And in May, CIRC issued a formal warning against mutual aid platforms, a significant area of startup growth, as they may “lack actuary-based pricing systems, provision against risks and strict supervision by government bodies.”
New demand for new insurance products
Insurance in China traces its roots as far back as 1805 when the British East India Co. set up operations in Guangzhou. But China as an insurance market only really started in the 1980s and only formally opened up to the outside world and foreign insurers in 1992.
That was then and this is now. In 2016, China is reportedly set to surpass Japan as the world’s second largest insurance market, with premium income growing 37% year-over-year to hit $287.9 billion in the first six months of the year, according to the CIRC. Within China, life insurance today comprises nearly 70% of all insurance premium, while auto insurance is king when it comes to P&C making up around 3/4ths of all P&C premium. 
 
Unlike the U.S. where a host of venture-backed startups are looking to build new digital brands in homeowners and renters insurance (think Lemonade, Jetty, Hippo and others), homeowners insurance has largely been a non-factor in China P&C and fire insurance is no longer mandatory for mortgages after a wave of complaints around the bundled annuity and investment products insurers paired it with.

More exciting is how fast online insurance buying is progressing in China. This includes both online distribution of traditional insurance products like health as well as products enabling the rise of the Internet economy in China like Zhong An credit or shipping returns insurance. According to a June report from Ant Financial and CBNdata, around 330 million people in China have bought insurance policies over the Internet through March 2016, up 42% from a year ago. Among those buyers, a notable 33% were born since 1990s. 
 
Broadly, insurance companies in China, both large and small, still have to deal with a user demand challenge. Not only is mass consumer awareness of insurance needs still incredibly low, those who are insurance-conscious are skeptical of its value. As one insurance executive in China at a global P&C insurer said,
“Chinese who are 40 years old and in urban cities are beginning to have assets and lifestyles to protect. These consumers would rather trust their own savings rather than insurance companies.”
Change effected by both upstarts and Internet giants could soon feel sudden, though. Consider that insurance bought online in China represented just 5.2% ($21.4 billion) of total industry premium in the first half of 2016. That’s compared to 4.7% in the same period a year ago and 4.2% in the same period in 2014, according to the Insurance Association of China.

Tech giants are incredibly eager to capitalize on insurance
Another very notable difference between insurance tech innovation in the U.S. and Europe and that of China is just how engaged the largest Chinese Internet giants are in asserting their positions through M&A, joint ventures, investments and more. Yes, China’s online insurance market has grown immensely over the past two years, but the concentrated industry efforts by China’s major Internet companies, Baidu, Alibaba/Ant, Tencent and/or Jingdong (BATJ) will likely accelerate that growth substantially and may result is a very different looking insurance tech landscape in China in the years to come.
 
It’s worth noting that the strategic moves by BATJ vary considerably in their depth and breadth. Here’s an abbreviated rundown of how BATJ’s efforts have progressed:
 
Alibaba/Ant Financial: After launching Zhong An in collaboration with Tencent and Ping An in 2013, Ant has arguably been the most active of China’s Internet giants in carving out its position in the insurance industry. These moves span from health, where Alibaba collaborated with Taiping Insurance to form an online health insurer with registered capital of $154 million, to life, where Ant backed China’s first mutual insurance association approved by CIRC to P&C, where Ant took a controlling stake in Cathay Insurance China. With more than 120 million daily transactions on Alipay and many customers using the app more than 10x a year, Ant’s ultimate goal for its insurance products could be to leverage its unique data and distribution advantages to take on existing conglomerates like Ping An in size and scope, and in a fraction of the time and resources needed.

Baidu: Baidu has made a couple major announcements regarding its insurance ambitions including Bai An, its joint venture around scenario-based insurance with Hillhouse Capital and Allianz, which it describes as “small, situational insurance protection offered for high-frequency, location-based or internet transactions, including online travel and various online-to-offline (O2O) services.” Baidu also announced a joint venture with China Pacific in June 2016 to launch a new online auto insurance carrier.
 
While Baidu has some marked advantages in the insurance space namely its trove of search data where it claims the personal profiles of 100 million Chinese users, its efforts to date have been mired by its recent ads scandal as both of its insurance products have yet to get past CIRC. If CIRC’s spurt of new online licenses last year was indeed a one-time phenomenon, this would suggest Bai An may have missed its window of opportunity. 
 
Jingdong: Alibaba rival Jingdong through its affiliate JD Finance has also waded into the insurance industry. In October 2015, JD Finance reportedly signed strategic framework agreement with the Sichuan government to establish an online property insurer and as of March of this year was recruiting for dozens of insurance-related positions.
 
Tencent: Outside of its participation in Zhong An’s founding, Tencent’s most notable announcement in the insurance industry came in September 2015 when it announced Hetai Life, an online life insurance joint venture with CITIC Group and its first foray into life insurance. In August 2016, the Tencent joint venture received CIRC approval to prepare for launch, which will be interesting to monitor on the product front given its potential friction with Tencent’s enormous success with micro-transactions.
 
Ultimately, all four bring their own immense value to (possibly) forthcoming insurance products: Tencent in social, Ant in commerce and online business data, Baidu in search and Jingdong in logistics. Depending on how fast their initiatives develop, China’s insurance tech and even its overall insurance landscape could look incredibly different in a very short amount of time.
2. Zhong An: World’s First Dominant Online Insurer
Zhong An: First-mover advantage?
 
Before all of these strategic moves, of course, was the first notable foray by China’s Internet giants: Zhong An Insurance, which is a case study for insurance innovators in the U.S. and elsewhere in and of itself. 
 
In November 2013, Alibaba and Tencent, teamed up with Ping An Insurance to launch the country’s first online insurance carrier with registered capital of $164 million and the only license at the time from CIRC to sell insurance online.

The following month, Zhong An launched its flagship product, Zhonglebao, effectively acting as e-commerce returns insurance for China’s $1 trillion dollar online and mobile e-commerce market. It was aimed at covering merchant shipping losses on Alibaba’s Taobao marketplace when consumers are dissatisfied with product purchases. Over 1 billion policies were sold in the first year.
 
Fast forward to 2016 and Zhong An had written more than 4 billion policies to more than 400 million customers. The online insurer has since expanded its product line in auto, health, and travel, and as of its latest financing event, carries a private market valuation of $8 billion with reported plans to go public as soon as 2017. 
 
That’s not to say Zhong An is future-proof. Taobao shipping returns insurance, for example, accounted for 77% of its overall premium in 2014. While it hasn’t broken out the data since, it will need to show it can reduce its dependency on its powerful partners as it looks to test the public markets.
 
Aggressive B2B2C distribution strategy
 
The concept of a traditional retail agent with a storefront is not common in China and there was never as much of a need for these intermediaries. Chinese online broker Zhongmin has tried to open local shops to sell insurance products in addition to other financial products like loans, but such has not been a successful model. Instead, distribution in China and most of Asia has been done through outbound telemarketing (OBTM) by way of banks, telecom providers and supermarkets that obtain phone numbers. Auto insurance, for example, is mostly bought through telephone with a captive agent and many agencies are unqualified or have gotten in trouble for misleading marketing tactics. As of 2012, over 190,000 were part-time agencies. As we heard a few times, “The Chinese market is mature in digital channels, but immature in regular channels.”
 
Dynamics between startups and tech conglomerates in China, though, lend to a uniquely collaborative environment. Zhong An is able to deeply integrate with distribution partners at a level that many counterparts in the U.S. would drool about giving it the ability to hit a variety of targeted customers with its insurance offerings at critical inflection points. Today, Zhong An has 300+ partners across health, travel, auto, e-commerce, banking and more.

For a new U.S. tech company to partner with Amazon, eBay, Stripe, Facebook, Google, Priceline, Pinterest, Handy, Lending Club, and Apple…at the same time without channel conflicts…would be nearly impossible.
 
For Zhong An to do what it has done in the short amount of time is quite astonishing, and a hat tip is owed to the regulatory and entrepreneurial conditions in China today. For U.S startups, investors and others in the industry, there are more takeaways to glean.
 
Insurance MVPs attached at the hip to tech MVPs
 
Beyond partnerships, Zhong An’s product iteration cycle is massively scaled. With the support of major investors, they have the wherewithal to test and measure micro-transaction products at a magnitude expected of a Y Combinator batch. Back in 2015, they had publicly launched 100+ products, and today, they have announced over 200. Zhong An CFO John Bi noted at the recent InsureTech Connect conference that the online insurer can launch a new insurance product in the span of five to six weeks. 
 
Besides products, Zhong An has been deploying infrastructure at breakneck speed, experimenting with customizable employee insurance platforms, the equivalent of worker’s comp systems for the massive Chinese O2O economy, its own cloud data processing platform for carriers, and a Zhong An API to partner with new partners.
 
To do this, they have a supply chain of very experienced executives, product managers, developers, designers, actuaries, underwriters, risk managers, claims manager who work well together and have multiple years of experience at Google, Allianz, HSBC, Alibaba, Ping An, and CITIC Bank.
 
At a high level, the way they do this is by getting Ping An product managers in the same room with Alibaba product managers and telling them to innovate and compete. The sub units’ bottom line is the volume of policies, premiums, and customers they can achieve. Actuaries and underwriters are at play, but they are secondary to the primary goal: a consumer land grab.
 
One can postulate the strategy behind the decision: the current RMB payout on a parametric or indemnity loss are so low that they probably counterweigh potentially high customer acquisition cost (CAC) later down the road. In China, as we have seen with the Didi Chuxing-Uber roll-up, consolidation and customer acquisition is key to winning.
 
Can there be a Zhong An of the U.S.?
 
For U.S. startups who want to sell auto, home, life insurance through partnerships or an insurance API, the reality is a bit more difficult. Though Facebook Messenger has been working to implement WeChat functionality, the transactions around mobile in the U.S. is not as rich as it is in China.
 
Partnerships between Berkshire Hathaway Travel Insurance and Visa or between Wells Fargo Online and Assurant renters insurance are one-off, and not as effective. Established startups such as NerdWallet, SoFi, or Credit Karma are also trying to figure out insurance distribution out themselves. They need to figure out broker licenses, win carrier appointments, or find paper, while the carriers in the U.S. are utilizing their trove of proprietary data and new third party tech and data vendors. 
 
Depending on who you talk to within the insurance space, more or less everybody knows that UI/UX, rating, and claims processes have to be improved, intermediaries are needed regardless if they are traditional or a new startup, and data will be utilized. It is very likely that elements of Zhong An and other Chinese insurance tech upstarts will take a different form in the U.S., but there is still much to be gleaned for U.S. startups, investors and others in the insurance industry on the product innovation front.
 
Market enablers lead to product innovation
 
The major enabling factors we described at the beginning of this paper have already led to a substantial amount of experimentation in both insurance and quasi-insurance products. Here are a few from just Zhong An:
Merchant Performance Insurance (MPI) — Partnership with Alibaba to protect merchant performance and guarantee deposits on TaoBao via Zhonglebao.
Weather Insurance — Via T-mall and WeChat, insurance pays out to cover extra living costs for record high temperatures.
Mobile Phone Repair Insurance — Offers repairs to physical damages made to Xiaomi smartphones.
Mobile App Security Insurance — Partnership with Baidu to cover fraudulent transaction processed on Baidu Mobile Guardian app.
P2P Loan Guarantee Insurance — Protects P2P lenders from defaulting payments on leading platforms like Tongxin.
Credit Insurance — Credit insurance policy underwritten by Zhong An for users obtaining credit lines when shopping on the Chinese eCommerce platform Mogujie.
Flight Delay Insurance — Partners with leading OTAs (Ctrip, Qunar) to provide insurance products covering flight cancellation, delays, and accidental injury priced based on historical flight delay ratio and paid through WeChat wallet.
To an insurance insider in the U.S., many of Zhong An’s flagship ‘insurance’ products don’t fit the traditional, Western definition of insurance since there is no clear indemnity. MPI and the end product Zhonglebao function more as a merchant clearinghouse. Weather insurance can be construed as a Groupon-like lead into local vendors. Mobile repair insurance is similar to Asurion / AppleCare warranties to promote customer retention. Mobile app security insurance has no real analog in the U.S. besides PayPal / Lookout; and P2P loan insurance is basically unheard of in the U.S.
 
More constructive for those in the U.S. looking to learn from China’s insurance tech landscape is to dig into what these products look like themselves. We highlight a few below:
3. Lessons through Product Walkthroughs
To better understand the true inertia of change in China, it is best to understand the user experience of what Chinese consumers see after they discover a new insurance product through WeChat or other online distribution channel. We highlight a few select examples below, but it’s worth noting that these make up a tiny portion of companies in China’s insurance innovation landscape today.
 
Zhong An
 
Zhong An has taken the approach of looking at every source of data under the sun, finding unmet needs among Chinese consumers and then inserting themselves into the process. Today, Zhong An has three main business lines: 1/ traditional insurance products 2/ creative insurance products enabled by technology (i.e. critical illness insurance utilizing wearable device data) and 3/ insurance products for the Internet economy (i.e. shipping returns insurance). 
 
One example of this is Zhong An’s vaccine insurance product in which product managers identified a host of bad vaccination outcomes in the news, studied vaccination data released by the Chinese government, and offered a corresponding risk product. Moreover, Zhong An also integrated with WeChat and other distribution channels to offer its vaccination insurance product right at the point of booking an appointment, an optimal market entry.

Indeed, health insurance has been a major area where Zhong An has focused more of its attention on the product front. As the product flow below shows, Zhong An not only prompts users with free or discounted insurance offerings but much more, including the ability to record 60 to 80-second office exercise videos and track exercise status, thus keeping its customers engaged with multiple touch points a year that can create significant value through cross-sell opportunities for its other products.

Another way that Zhong An and other insurance companies are innovating within the health insurance industry is by offering what we call “tailor-made” health insurance policies. The main idea here is to offer an insurance policy that caters to a specific age group and a predetermined list of diseases and extending their interaction and touch points with the insured into the policy period by providing video apps to consult with doctors.
This is significantly different than in the U.S. where ACA standardizes health plans and caps profit margins, and federal regulators are penalizing non-standard health plans.

Zhong An’s account page highlights another aspect of how it aims to be a widespread enabler of the Internet economy by promoting multiple touch points with its product(s). For example, Zhong An has formed a point structure in which users who sign in daily earn bonus points. Zhong An’s aim of becoming a more comprehensive financial services provider is also apparent from its account page: its wallet currently features a product named YuanBao, in which employees can borrow money from a third-party lender with a borrowing guarantee from Zhong An.

OkChexian: Rethinking auto “insurance”
 
OkChexian is an auto insurance start-up based out of Shanghai, which bills itself as one stop shop for all car-related needs. In addition to offering traditional auto insurance, OkChexian offers quasi-insurance products like “car wash subsidy” and “traffic jam subsidy”, and products like “oil price guessing” that cater to the speculative behavior of Chinese customers. Rather than labeling these products as insurance, it has labeled them as a subsidy or discounts, which help it stay clear from the purview of insurance regulators.
 
Taken separately, it would have been hard to build a business around any of these product categories, but when taken together, OkChexian has been able to create a hook for auto insurance policies, which have a higher margin.

As the screenshot below highlights, OkChexian is able to obtain the real-time location of its users by tapping into smartphone sensors when enabling its trip management function. This dongle-free approach is in contrast to how Metromile has used its Pulse OBD-II dongle to power its per-mile insurance though is closer to other startups opting for a sensor-based approach to UBI like Zendrive or TrueMotion. 
 
Within the trip management function (shown below), OkChexian also promotes its “traffic jam subsidy” service, which offers users gas coupons if the app detects that users are indeed caught in traffic jams.
 
Users can also participate in a daily “oil price guessing” by betting on the oil price movement the following day, with coupons of differing size as prizes for participants who guess correctly. These products may seem incredibly far-fetched to tech entrepreneurs and investors in the auto insurance space in the U.S., but in China, OkChexian has already touched more than 2 million users with these products.


Datebao
 
Xishan Information Technology dba Datebao started off by providing an online brokerage for premium health insurance products at affordable prices, but has quickly evolved into one of the largest distributors of health insurance products in China with nearly 5 million users today.

A big part of Datebao’s growth can be attributed to its novel distribution strategies. From offering flash sales to Groupon-like deals on insurance, Datebao has leveraged various e-commerce marketing strategies to expand the reach of its insurance products, as shown below. The challenges for Datebao are two-fold: 1/ Though they have been successful in acquiring customers for one-time products, can they turn these users into higher-value customers and 2/ China’s healthcare infrastructure is still immature and might have difficulty supporting Datebao’s business model if it continues to scale.

Shuidihuzhu and the rise of mutual aid platforms
 
Today, there are at least four different ‘mutual aid’ platforms with over 1 million users in China. These quasi-insurance products aggregate members who pay small fees, which contribute to a larger pool that promises certain payouts if a member is subject to a given event (e.g. critical illness, car accident) and primarily draw new members via WeChat. 
 
As we previously highlighted, mutual aid platforms have been a target of CIRC already and were the subject of a press conference in April warning against such plans that “have no stable financing or sound insurance solvency because there is no risk assessment or policy rates determination that should be based on actuarial calculation and liability reserve funds.”
 
One of the fastest-growing mutual aid platforms in China is Shuidihuzhu, launched by a former executive of Chinese group-buying giant Meituan-Dianping. Shuidihuzhu features two products on its app, AD&D mutual aid and cancer mutual aid, the latter of which has scaled past 1 million users in less than half a year. For Shuidihuzhu, a critical insight was that many low or middle-income Chinese cannot afford critical disease insurance premiums that need to be paid each year. As the screenshots below highlight, the app encourages signup growth by transparently promoting both its membership base and fee structure breakdown (as low as 3 RMB).
 
Whether or not these mutual aid platforms can outlast regulators in achieving breakout scale is to be determined (and perhaps unlikely), but for now they offer an interesting look at how certain quasi-insurance products can fit in China’s ecosystem and scale at a rapid pace especially as various ‘peer-to-peer’ branded insurance models become a point of debate in the U.S. and Europe.



4. Key Takeaways & Open Questions
Every week, a quick scan of 36kr (China’s TechCrunch equivalent) highlights another headline-grabbing development in China’s exciting insurance innovation landscape. As Zhong An looks to potentially test the public markets, China’s dynamic insurance tech market will likely become more visible to U.S. operators, investors and insurance executives. 
 
With that in mind, here are a few key takeaways and open questions on how insurance innovation in China might evolve over time:
 
Will regulators clamp down? While tech companies innovating in the insurance industry have benefitted from China having just one centralized regulatory body, whether the spate of approvals for online-only licenses will continue or whether ancillary activity such as the rise of mutual aid platforms will persist in its current growth is still an open question. This is a key difference. Whereas startups in the U.S. are allowed to grow without fear that regulators will clamp down as long as they follow the rules, those in China face the possibility of getting routed by regulators if deemed to be growing too fast for comfort.
 
Can a true startup succeed in insurance? While Zhong An has grown rapidly since its founding, it benefits immensely from the joint resources of its founding partners Alibaba, Tencent, and Ping An. Meanwhile, BATJ is playing a winner-take-all game as they look to expand into every part of the daily lives of Chinese consumers as well as how they protect it. As one investment executive said to us, “That’s why you don’t see a big tech giant in China born after 2000. Almost all were born before 2000. This is quite different from the U.S. market.”
 
 While China is an exciting breeding ground for insurance innovation, it remains an open question whether the majority of value will continue accrue to China’s Internet giants vs. startups hoping to break through.
 
Enough trust? On Alibaba’s last earnings call, the health of the Chinese vs. American consumer was a major talking point as executives touted the Chinese consumer’s healthy balance sheet and ability to spend:
First, take a look at the Chinese consumer. Chinese households today have aggregate net cash reserves of over US$4.6 trillion. This accumulated wealth and liquidity is the result of real double-digit wage growth over the past decade. In contrast, in early 2008 on the eve of the global financial crisis, household debt in the United States was 98% of GDP, and the average American family was in heavy debt.
However, insurers and insurance innovators alike still need to develop a lot of trust among the average Chinese consumer. In a recent survey, half or more Chinese consumers who criticized an insurance brand within the past 12 months did so “because of a frustrating claims process that is too slow, is not transparent enough, falls short of the customer’s payout expectations, or requires too much effort from the customer.” The new breed like Zhong An is trying to solve this problem by streamlining the claims process through WeChat and Alipay and offering low value products with the hope that users will gradually migrate to traditional high value products.
 
These are just a few of the questions still open on how insurance innovation will develop in China moving forward. We have the full expectation that the pace of market dynamics can (and will) cause some companies or ideas discussed in this paper to accelerate incredibly quickly or bear out in entirely different directions as existing players deviate strategies, new ones enter the market, and/or regulators clamp down.
 
Of course, we’re eager to hear from you. If you have any questions, critiques or ideas about China’s digital insurance market that we’ve failed to ask or introduce, we welcome your feedback!
 
Thanks to Monica Xie, TanTan Wang, Charlie Wang, Nancy Xu and Aya He for their help with this research and Douglas Jiang and Farron Blanc for their feedback.

The Folly of Health Insurance Tied to Employment
Give portability a chance

Healthcare law in the United States is a confusing mess, and that was true before the latest political debacle of repeal and replace in which Republicans attempted to switch out the current broken scheme for one that was simply broken in other ways. This failure has been trending news for a week and there is no need for me to rehash it here.
There is, however, hope for a solution. The New York Times reports that neither repeal nor replace are dead. According to some, the Republicans’ failure last week was a result of combining repeal and replace. Now Republicans are going to take their time.
'Repeal and Replace' Becomes 'Repeal vs. Replace'
In the past few weeks, various articles summarizing Republican moves on health care have attempted to analyze the…www.nationalreview.com
Senator Ted Cruz, of Texas, presented a promising outline for repeal and replace weeks ago in the vain hope of saving Republicans from their self-inflicted injury. His advice was not heeded, but it is worth revisiting now.
In “The Right Way to Repeal Obamacare” in Politico, Sen. Cruz offered the basics of his plan. After outlining a procedural strategy to seek repeal by relying on the 2015 repeal language overwhelmingly supported by Republicans, as well as adding the previously excluded insurance market regulations to repeal the entirety of Obamacare, he called for common sense reforms.
The Right Way to Repeal Obamacare
"Is Obamacare Republicans' Waterloo?" That was the question a reporter posed a couple weeks ago. It's the narrative…www.politico.com
Cruz is the rare legislator who recognizes that industries — healthcare included — do not require a 2,000 page monstrosity of a bill. (If the leglislators can’t absorb what they are voting for, how can we expect everyday citizens with livelihoods that do not allow for hours and hours spent pouring over insurance rules to manage their medical coverage?)
The proposed common sense reforms are: competitive and innovative insurance markets which are open across state lines and risk classes, health savings accounts, and portability.
Policy commentary often covers the advantages of competitive markets and the details of HSA’s. Here at Arc Digital yesterday, Ryan Huber started a series on healthcare. The first installment covered medical innovation costs and how high U.S. medical costs are partly a result of the U.S. subsidizing research for the rest of the world.
U.S. Health Care Reality Check #1: Pharmaceutical Innovation
Why does health care cost so much in the United States?arcdigital.media
Portability, however, gets short shrift. Americans are so used to our system of health insurance tied to our jobs that we hardly notice the oddity of having employers pay for employee health coverage. But it is odd.
(Bureau of Economic Analysis)
Why — how — did American health insurance become tied to employment? The answer is the same reason that buildings in London display a striking number of bricked over window openings: taxes.
Taxes are practically Pavlovian. Once upon a time, the English government based property taxes on the number of windows a structure had, and thus the people reduced their tax bill by covering up windows. In a similar fashion, U.S. federal government tied health insurance to employment by creating a New Deal tax dodge. Since that has happened, it has rarely occurred to us to mind the marriage, even though it is a source of many of our medical insurance woes.
Among the many crazy laws of the New Deal, such as destroying crops in the midst of a famine as memoralized by “kerosene sprayed over golden mountains” in The Grapes of Wrath, the 1942 Stabilization Act set salary caps. It was an income equality and inflationary measure, which in hindsight seems cruel compared to our modern minimum wage debates.
To entice the best available employees, employers started offering health coverage as additional compensation. Before WWII, healthcare was more catastrophic or palliative, but it didn’t take long for advances in the medical field to turn health insurance into something very desirable.
The off the tax-books compensation quickly became valuable enough that by 1945 the War Labor Board ruled that employers could not modify or cancel group insurance plans during the contract period. Employees had relied upon the offer of healthcare insurance, and so employers were obliged to keep offering it. Health insurance as an employment perk was becoming universal.
Then came the tax break to firmly and formally tie health insurance to employment. The 1954 Internal Revenue Code made employer contributions to employee health plans exempt from the employee’s taxable income and clarified that they were deductible expenses for the employer.
The lack of portability of health insurance? It is a bad habit encouraged by the tax code.
The tie worked well for those decades in which employees stayed with a single company for their entire life and in which insurance companies underestimated their costs. As healthcare has improved and our life spans have lenghtened — positive developments, of course — care costs rapidly changed.
It is easiest to see this in the long-term care market. When long-term care plans for elders became popular, actuaries underestimated not only how many people would live past the time they could care for themselves, but also how many years they might live in that condition. Thus, the early long-term care plans were cheap. Now only a handful of insurance companies offer them because they are so expensive.
Why Long-term Care Insurance Is Becoming a Tougher Call
Mary Julia Klimenko thought she was prudent 20 years ago when she invested in a long-term care insurance policy, one…time.com
The general healthcare insurance market did not miss by quite that much, but rising costs made employers reluctant or unable to continue carrying plans by the turn of the century. The American workforce had already become more mobile and faced the complications of switching insurance whenever they switched jobs, or sourcing their own insurance for those independent contractors of the gig economy.
But the U.S. insurance market was neither set up nor regulated to allow for proper development of an individual insurance market. We still look to fix healthcare through employment-based plans, and many of the tangential debates, such as birth control coverage, are a direct result of our unnecessary habit.
Taxes and habit hold our health insurance and employment together. The portability that Sen. Cruz has suggested is radical only because it has occurred to so few policy makers. But the people and the economy have been clamoring for this reform for some time.
Let’s give portability a chance and stop crafting leglislation based on an employer-provided healthcare model.


Credit: Pictures of Money
Blockchains & Platforms: shaping the future of Insurance and Liabilities
Despite the outlook on risk management — and generally on insurance business — is changing a lot on a global scale, as explained a few days ago by Rob Moffat on Medium and Livio Hughes on the post*shift blog, we are all extremely surprised about how the giants in the insurance industry are sitting in peaceful thinking that their industry is — essentially — protected from any disruption.
As explained effectively by Moffat in his piece, a new actor who decides to enter in the insurance industry has to overcome at least three key barriers:
the regulatory barrier (the insurance industry, such as banking, is heavily regulated)
the one of capital (traditionally insurance companies hold the necessary capital to repay its customers in the event of a claim)
that of the capability to compute risk models by accessing necessary historical data to make risk calculations for the use cases and situations that are normally insured.
However, things could change quickly.
How are business processes and their dependence on risk, changing?
If, on one side, global risk factors that can affect human economies appear to increase (eg: the geopolitical frictions, the risk related to climate instabilities), in an equally fascinating trend, our economy and the business processes that make it up are gradually moving towards lower “operational” risk.
First of all, automation is a powerful trend. Think of autonomous vehicles: these vehicles will be involved in increasingly less accidents, the risk related to insurance coverage on transport, logistics and mobility, will globally decrease, and the insurance burden will gradually shift from the passenger (in the future people will be less likely to own the car they use) to the companies owning fleets, with evident efficiencies. For example, car-sharing operators will pay less in aggregate than car owners would pay , (car possession, today, is somehow made obsolete).
Credits (Ken Conley)
In other sectors (the health sector for example) processes supported by artificial intelligence will help us reducing the impact of human errors, by improving the accuracy of diagnosis and by offering increasingly personalized care these innovations will hopefully decrease health related risks at the global level.
The pervasiveness of information will also make the production processes (increasingly performed by machines) less dependent on unreliable data.
The risk of carrying out unnecessary operations that could potentially create waste or errors (a simple example: a bus that go by a route without passengers waiting) is decreasing.
Think of how, a ubiquitous information, can help us to optimize the logistics of perishable goods — such as food — eliminating risk factors such as food poisoning, and many other accidents. Also it the availability of historical information on people and companies is growing: powerful reputation management systems are born and are consolidating every day more and they help us to take less risks in economic activity and to select the best suppliers and partners.
The Just-in-time production is also an effective way to eliminate waste and logistic risks and — in addition — is characterised by leaner and agile processes that can help us to create the most accurate and relevant products and services for customers, again, intrinsically diminishing the risk related to business activity.
The unbundling of risk and the corporation
In the medium/long term, the Blockchain will be the place where all the relevant information we’ve discussed so far, will be stored as open and public data. Storing publicly and transparently all this risk related information will have a huge impact on risk management models.
When all the information related to business processes is stored online with a reasonably low latency, this makes the risk connected substantially “unbundled”: for example think of being able to access at the geo-referenced location of a truck, its internal temperature (if there is food inside) or even the information about the driver’s state of health.
If until yesterday you had to insure a food distribution by truck from the beginning till the end of the journey (or usually have a framework agreement between the logistics company and the insurer), the insurance provider of tomorrow — that will look more like a high speed risk trader — will be able to secure even a few minutes of the truck route or, maybe, a specific geographical area.
Having the necessary information to calculate risk publicly available almost in real time, will open new ways for the risk negotiation made by autonomous systems (algorithms and bots) and for a huge dose of disruption in the insurance business: a bit like we’ve seen in financial trading with High-frequency trading.
The penetration of the Blockchain, with information available to the public and the strengthening of bots and artificial intelligence adoption will be essential for the birth of a true peer to peer — and less heavily mediated — risk market (as CoinDesk explained few days ago).
In the future foreseen by Olivier Rikken there are three possible roles:
1. that of the user who requires a personalized insurance model (along with other peers),
2. that of the investor who wants to monetize capital
3. that of the insurer who will deal with bringing together these two requirements (a real platform)
“By acting as the provider of the marketplace and the risk intelligence, insurers gain a number of benefits. The capital needed to insure the customers remains at the investors, so the insurer, in turn, can operate with minimal levels of capital or even become completely capital-free.” (from Olivier Rikken on Coindesk)
So risk management is easier, but to identify who is liable is more difficult
However the impact of the Blockchain technology will probably not stop here in the field of insurance and liability. You may have heard of DAO (Decentralized Autonomous Organization): in the last few weeks the most important DAO project so far — the, slock.it inspired, The Dao — raised the equivalent of more than a hundred million dollars in just few days, attracting interest and concerns.

Essentially a DAO is a complex agreement between equals, who lives in the code.
It looks like an organization, but it is not legally constituted and has no legal status whatsoever.
The software code may be in the familiar form of a client application — that many peers can use to join a “network” — or in the less familiar form of the so-called “smart contract”.
A smart contract is a special software code that — in essence — is managed independently from the interaction of client software that make up the DAO and it’s able to do many interesting things. Today, a smart contract can, for example, transfer funds or property when particular conditions occur. Using intelligent objects such as “smart locks” as the Ethereum computer of Slock.it — essentially actuators connected to the network — the DAO would be able not only to open doors and windows but also to command a self driving car or drone and much more. At one point the features of a DAO may include the ability to buy products, hire contractors and extend the impact well beyond the realm of software or smart objects.
DAOs: exciting as a headless Godzilla walking on your home
Godzilla (from 1954)
Sounds exciting huh? It’s exciting just like a headless Godzilla inexorably walking on your home. Challenging.
In fact DAOs are essentially legal forms that are not yet recognized.
Trying to sue them in court or to make them responsible for any problems could be a daunting task. If nobody possesses it, we might be tempted to think that no one is essentially responsible and that everyone interacts with the DAO at its own risk, a risk that he should be able to calculate. A bit as we did in the early days of Bitcoin, you may be tempted to say: “use it at your own risk.”
But are we — as a society — likely to have to deal with this risk framework and with this passivity to potentially so powerful entities? I don’t buy it.
As some have already pointed out (read “How to Sue a DAO” which well explains the Anglo-Saxon context) when it comes to assess who is responsible, the law — according to the different codes of law that we have in the different countries — will be able to find a way to identify the person responsible and, in some cases, this person will have the traits of the scapegoat, or of the one who, perhaps unconsciously, may end up being who bears most of the responsibility.
So, if on one hand the DAO, the smart contracts and public data on Blockchain, represent a powerful new set of tools that can eliminate bureaucracies and make disruption of the incumbent, on the other hand these instruments are in direct conflict with the concept of responsibility in top of which we have built the history of the trade and of our business.
I think that this discontinuity will lead us to see a great transformation of the market for those who are in the insurance and liability sectors and in general for all the brands.
The future of the insurance will therefore be on one side unbundled and commoditized — with trading of standardized risk and high-speed on Blockchain — and on the other will be a key process to give the brand a chance to take responsibility for complex and dynamic business processes that they will create by combining components as the DAO, smart contracts, distributed resources and open-source data: that “general intellect” that — despite the destructive force — can not be held legally responsible.
In a nutshell, Platforms (not only in the insurance industry) will increasingly take advantage of distributed tools and resources to build their business processes. These processes will be made of activities and information that are not owned by the brand itself, but of which the brand will be accountable for towards the user and the law; in doing so, the ability to calculate the overall risk of such complex combinations, will be an essential factor in determining the success of tomorrow’s brands and companies.
[An italian edit of this post is available on CheFuturo at this link “Come ti cambio la gestione del rischio con la blockchain (e i suoi effetti sul business)”]

Which is the greatest frustration of the insurance companies responsible for providing us care. Thanks for the immensely better coverage via Medicaid, Obama, I’ll miss you.

Paul Ryan won’t say how many people will lose insurance under Trumpcare
“It’s up to people.”
CREDIT: AP Photo/J. Scott Applewhite
On Sunday, Trumpcare architect-in-chief Speaker Paul Ryan (R-WI) said he didn’t know how many people would lose their insurance under his Obamacare replacement plan.
In a revealing exchange with CBS News, he suggested that it was “up to people” how far the uninsured rate would climb.
“Here’s the premise of your question: Are you going to stop mandating people buy health insurance?” he said. “People are going to do what they want to do with their lives, because we believe in individual freedom in this country. So the question is, are we providing a system where people have access to health care insurance if they choose to do so?”

In a sense, Ryan is correct that it would be “up to people” how much health coverage would shrink. Trumpcare provides more “freedom” than Obamacare by scrapping the individual mandate — the provision of the Affordable Care Act which penalizes individuals who choose to go without health insurance — and replacing it with a new system that punishes anyone who tries to leave the insurance pool and then come back later on.
The individual mandate exists to prevent what health policy experts call a “death spiral,” where insurance premiums climb asymptotically as the cost of insuring people becomes more and more expensive. Here’s how it works: Without the mandate, healthier people have less incentive to buy insurance, so it’s likelier that more of them would drop out of the insurance market. But that makes the risk pool riskier, since it would now be disproportionately comprised of people who are sicker, and therefore costlier to insure. That would force insurance companies to raise their premiums, which in turn would push more individuals to drop their insurance, leaving behind an even higher-risk pool and causing premiums to shoot up even more. And so on.
Paul Ryan admitted he has no idea how health insurance works
Ladies and gentlemen, meet the conservative movement’s Great Wonk.thinkprogress.org
In his CBS interview, Ryan suggested that the insured rate would drop because, without the mandate, people would be more free to choose life without health insurance. But those who make that choice will disproportionately be the young and healthy, and by leaving the insurance market they would end up driving premiums sky high for those who remain. It’s likely that health insurance would then become far too expensive even for many of those who do want it.
That’s a strange kind of liberty: A world where everyone has, in theory, the abstract freedom to buy health insurance, but only a select few can actually afford it.
For those who love that particular kind of freedom, the Trumpcare bill includes even more good news: Because it reduces subsidies for low-income people to buy insurance, health care would start getting more expensive under the law even before the death spiral kicked in.

Insurance finally jumps on the FinTech bandwagon
This week is London Technology Week and Innovate Finance has launched its own series of complimentary events, focusing on FinTech. Our second event, Insuring the Future of FinTech, brought together incumbents and startups to discuss the trends and opportunities in the space — connected devices to digitalisation, the potential is huge.
#IFWEEK Insuring the Future Through FinTech, Tuesday 16th June 2015
The arrival of the FinTech unicorns, or billion dollar-valued companies, has been widely publicised. There are 36 of these FinTech unicorns globally, however, only three of those companies fall into the insurance space. Whilst peer-to-peer lenders and money transfer startups threaten incumbent banks, large insurers have remained largely unchallenged. Thunprecedented turnout at our insurance event, suggests that things are about to change. In fact, 2015 is already the biggest year on record in terms of investment in the insurance technology space, with $831 million invested so far in the US across 20 deals.
So what has sparked this change? And will it actually make a difference?
Innovation in the insurance space will be and has largely been driven by the availability of data-driven insights. Not only are insurers becoming better at interpreting data, but the availability of data is rapidly increasing, for example, due to the Internet of Things (IoT). The lines between our digital and physical worlds are being progressively blurred. Smart devices, from wearables, to home sensors and vehicle telematics, are expanding our insight into and control over the physical world, promising to transform the insurance industry forever. The data which these connected devices gather is allowing insurers to refine risk and redefine their products, revolutionising customer relations. Rather than receiving a premium based on aggregate demographic considerations, data-driven insights can, for the first time, allow insurers to offer their customers bespoke products.
As noted by our participants, this is already taking place in the auto insurance space, with new models based on vehicle telematics. FinTech startups such as InsureTheBox and Drive Like A Girl, as well as established players such as Aviva already use metrics such as how customers drive or how often they hit the brakes, to personalise premiums.
Similar models are beginning to be applied in the health insurance sector. John Egan, Director at Anthemis, noted that above 50% startups in the insurance space are now focusing on wearables and health. One could foresee a future in which wearable devices will allow insurers to reward individuals who exercise regularly and eat healthily via lower premiums. Likewise, John imagines a consumer ordering a plate of fries and a beer at a restaurant and subsequently being penalised with a higher premium.
With everything connected, what could go wrong?
Although the IoT and the subsequent customisation of insurance products should be perceived as a positive step forward, Wern Ding from Swiss Re rightly pointed out that these developments will undoubtedly give rise to privacy concerns, “there will always be a question mark in terms of the value an individual places on his or her privacy.” Consumers will have to balance premium discounts with the fact that the company owns their data and profile. The key for insurers, in this case, will be to notify individuals about how their activities are being assessed, give them the choice of ‘opting in’ and explicitly share with them the choices of actionable information at the decision-stage.
Another barrier to the adoption of IoT in insurance is the cybersecurity issue of sharing multiple devices and networks. It has been said that 70% of the most commonly used IoT devices contain vulnerabilities, as devices and networks can be hacked. This represents a huge barrier for insurers who will sooner or later depend on the data extracted from those networks and devices to provide a more personalised service.
But the biggest risk of all might be if insurers miss the opportunity on IoT altogether and merely use data from connected devices to tweak their product offering. With devices connected to businesses, homes and cars, organisations are going to begin to offer solutions that have the IoT connected and services tied to that. This opens up an opportunity for those organisations, perhaps digital giants such as Google or Amazon, to manage the customer relationship, customer loyalty and the customer experience, with insurance just being a small part of that offering. For instance, one can foresee a future where connected thermostats monitor the humidity levels of homes so as to detect potential mould and will be sold with specific housing insurance tied into them. So for insurers to stay relevant, it is vital that they consider these new business opportunities.
A final note on digitalisation
Clearly, IoT is a vital part of the conversations on the future of insurance, digitalisation will play an equally important role in this moving forward. James York, founder of Worry + Peace, pointed to the fact that individuals have become accustomed to seamless user experiences and have come to base their expectations for insurance on their interactions with services such as Uber or Spotify. Customers want to be able to use a channel most convenient at that moment, whether that’s a website, mobile app, call centre or video chat with a broker. Similarly, insurers could be taking social media more seriously, recognising its value as a relatively inexpensive marketing tool and a means to engage with and influence skeptical, digitally-savvy younger consumers. Addressing this digital challenge is a matter of survival, as those insurance companies that act too late, or stumble through the transition will undoubtedly lose consumers and market share.
Whilst many incumbents have identified digital and IoT opportunities, a host of new startups, some of which were present at our insurance event, are beginning to break into the space. Gaggel, for instance, aims to make insurance fairer and more transparent and has introduced an element of risk sharing amongst a consumer’s chosen peer group. Likewise, Worry + Peace markets itself as the new personal insurance destination for the modern digital shopper and has recently launched an own-brand Gadget Insurance product. Bought By Many offers another interesting solution by inviting groups of people with specific insurance needs to club together and then negotiates better policies on their behalf.
Whether one of these FinTech startups will be the next unicorn, has yet to be seen. However, given the discussion which took place at our #Insurance Knowledge Hack, there is no doubt that the next few years will see the rise of more billion dollar insurance startups.
Got an idea of who could be the next insurance unicorn? Think you know which innovations and trends will drive the insurance industry forward? Let us know in comments or tweet @InnFin using the #IFWEEK hashtag.

You do realize that there are countries that manage to provide single payer health insurance, right? Apparently your massive research failed to delve into how they manage to accomplish that.


My Health Insurance Just Shut Down Operations. I’m Scared.
Do 200,000 New Yorkers deserve “Shut Down Subsidies” as recourse after losing their Health Republic insurance network?
In November of 2013 I wrote about my experience navigating the New York State Marketplace. The process was too complicated but I was so excited when I finally settled on a plan. I believed I had done my research and asked the right questions. And I had. But it hasn’t been easy.
18 months later I wrote a followup post describing how difficult my health insurance experience had been. I called that post One Year Later: Health Republic Affordable Care Act Health Insurance Has Failed Me. And it had.
Since that post, I had found an amazing ally at Health Republic. This wonderful woman and I emailed at least weekly. And through our communications, my experience with Health Republic improved immeasurably. Most importantly, my doctors were finally getting paid. They even got paid on time.
And then I got this email. Suddenly it feels as though my whole world has shattered. It quite literally took my breath away.
Good Morning Liz,
I hope this message finds you well.
I am writing to provide some very unfortunate news… On Friday Health Republic was told to shut down operations by the end of the year. This is a surprise to the staff as well as the members as we (internally) were preparing for open enrollment and continued growth and improvement for the upcoming year. I am writing to you, now, to ensure I am able to say “farewell”…It has been a pleasure providing assistance to you. Although Health Republic may no longer be after this year, I hope that you’ll never forget us and what we strived for, even through the frustrations of the unique operational model you encountered. Although I may be unable to assist, directly (after a presently unknown date), or provide guidance, I would like to extend my contact details. If you ever need an ear, a shoulder, an opinion… you can feel free to reach out to me. My email address is below.
Best regards,
It took two years to get my Health Insurance plan to work for me. And when it started to work, it became a support system. I recently needed to see a Neuro Ophthalmologist. The reasons why were scary. And when I mentioned to my Health Republic ally how long it would take to get in, they called the doc and got me an appointment the very next day. When I arrived for the appointment, I found an email in my inbox from my HR ally asking if I had arrived, asking if I needed any help. And when I left, I got an email from my HR ally wishing me well. She felt relief when I told her it was all going to be ok.
Now it’s gone. And I don’t know what to do. Do I just start over, I don’t want another two year fight to get the coverage I need. Do I find out where my Health Republic ally is going and follow her? She cared. I want someone to care. Or do I give up on my doctors, the doctors who have not only brought me back to life, but given me a life in which I can thrive. I know I won’t choose the latter. But I’m lost. I wish the plan I had worked so hard for carried over. Because without it, I’m lost. Scared. And heartbroken.
All I can say is I’m bearing the grunt of some incredible nation-wide growing pains. I can only hope that my continued fight will have a positive affect on a system that will eventually work. Because it will eventually work. It has to. It can’t stay like this. I deserve better. I deserve everything my Health Republic ally gave me. And so do you.
… and no, it’s not Obama’s fault.
Update: Please take a moment to consider that I am just one of 200,000 New Yorkers who have found themselves in this situation. I believe there needs to be some recourse. And consider how gracious the email was that my my now jobless ally sent me. Heartbreak abounds.
Update: I have reached out to New York State of Health asking for recourse (a shut down subsidy?). I will let you know when they respond. This is what I said:
Hi NY State of Health. I just received notice that my health insurance is shutting down at the end of this year. I believe I (as well as other Health Republic insurees) are deserving of a little recourse. I have a letter from Health Republic stating my Out of Network doctor is covered as in network in perpetuity, and I would like your assistance in assuring this coverage is carried over to my next Marketplace plan. Can you please help me get back in touch with the right person to make this happen? Thanks so much.


One Year Later: Health Republic Affordable Care Act Health Insurance Has Failed Me.
My name is Liz Jackson. I’m a 33 year old New Yorker. I have a chronic neuromuscular condition. And I have doctors. Lots of doctors. Who need to be paid. I am writing this post because I don’t know what to do to ensure my doctors will get paid. The issue is my health insurance. I selected Health Republic from the New York State marketplace. And they haven’t been living up to their end of the bargain. This post is a plea for help. Do you have resources? Do you have advice? Are you the Attorney General? My doctors have sacrificed so much for me. They need to be paid. And they deserve to know why they haven’t been.
Other things you may want to know. I’m smart. I’m resilient. I am well educated. I am persistent. Seriously, I am PERSISTENT. I’m a vocal supporter of the Affordable Care Act. And a year ago, I wrote an enthusiastic and optimistic post titled 15 Days On The Obamacare Marketplace. Since then, I have failed to successfully navigate the Health Republic NY Silver plan I selected.
So if I, an intelligent 33 year old, college educated, persistent adult with time and access cannot navigate my Affordable Care Act health insurance… who can?
This is a list of email correspondences I have had with Health Republic NY. There are over 100 emails. This doesn’t take into account the calls I have made to both Health Republic, NY State of Health, Community Health Advocates and The Attorney General’s Office.
3/7/14 Spoke with Representative prior to signing up about long term continuation of coverage with an out of network doctor. She provided me with an Access to Care and Transitional Out of Network Referral Form.
4/23/14 I submitted the Access to Care form prior to start date. I cited recommendations by Kathleen Sebelius about continuation of coverage. I inquired about the process to submit and review.
4/24/14 I am notified that my Health Insurance had an effective start date of 4/1/14, even though I was covered by employee health insurance until the end of April. This requires 6 phone calls to Health Republic and NY State of Health before the situation is resolved. It took hours.
5/1/14 I’m now covered under a Health Republic NY Silver Plan
9/2014 Health Republic has not paid for May for my Out of Network doctor (who will now be referred to as OND), even though I was informed the doctor would be covered as in network per my request on 4/23/14.
9/26/14 I was told claims were paid.
10/10/14 My OND still has not received payment.
10/20/14: My OND receives payment from Health Republic in the form of a Credit Card. Seriously.
11/6/14 I can’t find an in network dermatologist, I call every dermatologist within 30 minutes, and each of them have dropped Health Republic, citing discomfort with coverage. I have to go past New York State’s 30 Minute 30 Mile law to see a doctor for a rosacea flare up. I asked Health Republic to update their dermatologists and they weren’t willing to do this.
I tell this to Health Republic:
“There is the exception of [redacted] Dermatology P.C. but their reviews online consist of rudeness, pain, aggressiveness, and a mean staff.”
11/5/14 I was notified that my approval for my OND was only for 90 days. I specifically had asked prior to joining Health Republic for no end date on continuation of coverage, citing a chronic illness. Health Republic said they made OND aware of this 90 day condition. OND was not made aware. I send Health Republic a copy of what OND received.
12/15/14 Health Republic says in writing they will give me until Feb of 2015 and then stop OND’s coverage. But an hour prior I had recorded a call where I was told they were going to give me limitless coverage. They acquiesce. OND is now covered. I receive a letter in writing.
12/18/14 There’s a billing Issue. I just logged onto Health Republic to pay my bill and it went from $114 to $2127. Takes months to resolve billing issue.
1/22/15 I inquire as to why OND hasn’t been paid since we received letter of ongoing coverage.
1/25/15 Was told claims were in process.
2/5/15 OND still hasn’t received payment for October November December or January
2/6/15 I’m told claims were incorrectly declined, resubmit.
2/23/15 OND still hasn’t received payment
3/2/15 Claims denied again in error — for October 2014 moving forward
3/15/15 Billing issue with Primary Care (In Network) I keep getting charged $15 when I think copay should be $0 My card has two Co-Pay’s listed:
Primary Physician Co-Pay — $0
Primary Care Co-Pay — $15
I had assumed that since my doctor was my primary care physician, there would be no co-pay. I was wrong. I now owe $15 for every primary care visit since 5/1/2014
3/16/15 OND receives request for doctors notes. OND believes the request is illegal. Still hasn’t been paid. Health Republic tells me the request for doctors notes was an error. OND won’t see me again until she’s paid. I tweet to every member of Health Republic’s board.
3/18/15 OND gets paid for October November December and January
4/14/15 I inquire about February as OND hasn’t been paid. I am told my contact at Health Republic (who I was comfortable communicating with) was no longer in the dept and will no longer help me.
4/22/15 New Health Republic rep writes to say claims for February are still in process. I respond with a series of questions, explaining how the last time my OND’s claims were in process they were incorrectly denied. I also ask a series of questions, most notably the fairness of advertising a benefit like acupuncture on the marketplace when Health Republic pays only 9% ($8) of the bill.

5/6/15 I write old rep saying new rep hasn’t answered any of my questions.
5/11/15 I write every Health Republic email I have. This is what I say:
“I wrote 27 days ago with a series of questions and still have no response. [New Rep], if you are not able to assist me in the manner that [Old Rep] was able, will you please forward my information to someone who can?
This is 3 months after the last fiasco and I was promised this would not happen again. My doctor has not been paid since January and she is growing impatient. I was happy working with [Old Rep], I need a solution that prevents this from continuing to happen.”
5/11/15 Again I’m told claims for Feb and March are still in process. I ask for clarification.
5/13/15 I receive claim numbers for finalized claims. No details on when checks will be sent. I also learn that my Out of Pocket is not $1,000 as I thought but $4,500. And my deductible is not $0 as I thought but $2,000. I scour my records for proof, realize none was ever sent by NY State of Health or Health Republic. There’s no record of what I signed up for. How can I be expected to trust Health Republic’s word?
5/19/15 NY State of Health informs me they’re not able to access the information for what I signed up for. I contact the Attorney Generals Office. Health Republic offers to make a call to NY State of Health with me. I decide to hold off and wait for AG’s office.
5/20/15 Speak with an advocate at the AG’s office
5/21/15 discover my monthly Health Republic payment has gone up (again) from $119.16 a month to $2,080.16. I also receive a letter saying I’m maxed out on benefits for Acupuncture (this is an in-network Acupuncturist, and Health Republic rejected every claim she submitted). I start this list. I will be updating.
Currently, I have not had anyone speak with me about
- Whether OND’s check has been mailed
- Why my benefits are so low on acupuncture (when it is advertised on the marketplace as a benefit)
- Why I’m maxed out on benefits on acupuncture
- How I can get my OND paid on time
- How to get my payment back down to $119.16
- What could have possibly happened to cause such a disconnect between what I thought my out of network/deductible were and what Health Republic tells me they are. Why is there no proof.
- And who my dedicated health republic representative will be.
I have written emails begging (BEGGING) for help, for an advocate, for someone to dedicate a few hours of their time. I have begged dozens of times. There’s no asking I can do to get their attention. I have spoken with various representatives within Health Republic (including the Corporate level) and nothing works.
My OND is someone who previously would have considered carrying an Affordable Care Act insurance. But I can’t imagine she would ever consider it now, not after the blind eye Health Republic has turned to her. I will reiterate, she still hasn’t been paid for February, March or April. It suddenly seems so obvious why there are no in network dermatologists within 30 minutes of my NYC home.
So again I must ask. If I, a college educated, persistent, adult who is aware of my rights cannot navigate Health Republic’s marketplace insurance… who (WHO!) can?
One Final Note: I am also a trained healthcare advocate.

All Millennials Should Understand These 4 Simple Truths about Insurance
Do you really understand what your policy covers?
Everyone should know what their home or auto policy covers. Sign up for a free policy review with one of Covered’s insurance experts.
Want to stop a conversation dead it its tracks? Ask your friends about their home or auto insurance. You’ll be greeted with blank stares and awkward silence, and will likely receive fewer invites to social gatherings in the future.
As confusing (and boring) as insurance is, it’s vital to know the basics and understand what your home or auto policy covers — otherwise, you might be setting yourself up for a world of hurt when something unexpected happens.

To help you wrap your head around the complexities of insurance, here are 4 simple truths that anyone with a home or auto policy should understand.
Insurance isn’t a warranty
You buy homeowner’s insurance to protect yourself against specific losses, such a fire, theft, weather damage, and other unexpected events. Unlike the warranty you buy for an expensive TV or a fancy refrigerator, insurance doesn’t cover normal wear and tear such as leaks, cracks, or routine maintenance.
If your water heater suddenly stops working, your insurance will not pay for a replacement. However, if your water heater is damaged by a specific event that you have coverage for (say, a burglary), your insurance company will pay for repairs or a replacement.
Insurance is not a maintenance plan or warranty. Keeping your home or vehicle in working order will always be up to you.
Your stuff is worth less than you think
Read your insurance policy carefully and make sure you understand if you have actual cash value coverage or replacement cost coverage.
Replacement cost coverage is much better, but you pay a price for it. This type of coverage pays the amount it will cost to replace damaged property (due to a covered cause of loss) with new comparable goods, despite the age or condition of the damaged property.
Let’s say you paid $500 for a state-of-the-art tube TV with a built-in DVD player. 10 years later, your TV is destroyed in a fire. If you have replacement cost coverage, your insurer will pay for the cost to buy the same TV today, new. You’ll get whatever amount it would cost to go out and buy the exact same TV today (good luck finding one that’s still for sale though).
If you have actual cash value coverage, your insurer will decide how much the tv was worth after factoring in 10 years of depreciation. They’ll likely reimburse you for way less than you originally paid since a tube TV with 10 years of use isn’t worth very much.
“Full coverage” isn’t really a thing.
When you’re shopping for home or auto insurance, you will never find a policy or package that is called “full coverage.” It simply doesn’t exist. While there are different levels of coverage you can buy when shopping for home or auto insurance, no single policy will provide protection against every possible scenario.
Coverage gaps are serious, and it’s important to at least consider purchasing an umbrella for additional coverage.
If you think you’re buying full coverage, you’re not. There are ALWAYS exclusions in an insurance policy. Read your policy carefully and make sure you understand what’s excluded.
Filing a bunch of claims can jack up your rates
If you file an excessive amount of claims, your insurance company can — and likely, will — raise your rates. They can even deem you too “risky,” and decline to renew your policy once you reach the end of your term.
I know what you’re thinking: “How can an insurance company penalize me for using a service I paid for?”
When it comes to increased premium due to filing insurance claims, it’s not just the severity of the claim that drives rates, but also the frequency of filing claims. This is why it makes sense to avoid filing claims for minor auto or home issues.
If you want to be financially responsible and prepared for unexpected losses, you need to know how your insurance works and what it covers. No one ever wants to find themselves saying, “but I thought that was covered!” after their roof caves in.
Unsure of what’s covered in your home or auto policy? Sign up for a free policy review with one of Covered’s insurance experts.

The State of Insurance Technology in Ten Visuals
We cover many emerging markets in the startup ecosystem. We have previously shared a series of posts that summarized Financial Technology, Internet of Things, Bitcoin, Artificial Intelligence, and MarTech in six visuals. This week, we do the same with Insurance Technology, but with 10 visuals.
At this time, we are tracking 876 Insurance Technology companies across 13 categories, with a combined funding amount of $4.63 billion. To see all of our Insurance Tech related posts, check out our blog!
The ten Insurance Tech visuals below help make sense of this dynamic market:
Market Overview: Breakdown of Insurance Tech into categories.
Number of Companies Per Category: Bar graph summarizing the number of companies in each Insurance Tech category.
Average Company Funding By Category: Bar graph summarizing the average company funding per Insurance Tech category.
Venture Investing in Insurance Tech: Graph comparing total venture investing in Insurance Tech to the number of companies in each category.
Global Breakdown of Insurance Tech: Heat map indicating where Insurance Tech companies exist.
Median Age of Insurance Tech Categories: Bar graph of each Insurance Tech category by median age.
Founding Date Distribution: Bar graph indicating the years in which Insurance Tech startups were founded.
Funding by Vintage Year: Bar graph that indicates the level of funding in Insurance Tech startups by vintage year.
Company Headcount Distribution: Bar graph distributing the number of Insurance Tech companies in different headcount ranges.
Top Investors in Insurance Tech: Bar graph indicating which investors invest in Insurance Tech most frequently.
1. Insurance Technology Market Overview

Product Insurance — These companies offer insurance/warranties for products that you purchase, from tech gadgets to diamonds.
Auto Insurance — These companies offer car insurance, including car telematics products which detect your mileage and driving behavior to customize your insurance plan.
Health/Travel insurance — These companies offer health or travel insurance, either for individuals or for businesses.
Life, Home, Property & Casualty Insurance — These companies offer life, home, and property & casualty insurance, as well as other kinds of insurance such as renters, disability, and marriage insurance.
Enterprise Insurance — These companies offer insurance plans for businesses, startups, freelancers, etc.
Insurance Comparison/Marketplace — These companies serve as a marketplace for consumers to buy insurance of any kind (car to home to health), or compare different insurance providers. These are 3rd party companies that don’t offer insurance plans themselves, but act as a brokerage agent between insurance providers and consumers.
Reinsurance — These companies provide insurance for other insurance companies.
P2P Insurance — These companies offer peer-to-peer insurance, in which a group of policyholders jointly pay for the insurance of an item that they mutually own, share, or rent (a car, a house, media equipment, etc).
Insurance Data/Intelligence– These companies collect, process, and analyze data analytics and business intelligence for the insurance industry.
Insurance User Acquisition — These companies help insurance companies acquire and manage new leads and clients.
Insurance Infrastructure/Backend — These companies help insurance companies with their day-to-day operations, including CRM for agents and lawyers, communication tools, claim filing tools, etc.
Insurance Investors/Education — These companies are investment firms that specifically invest and incubate new insurance companies, as well as resources that give information about how insurance works
Consumer Insurance Management Platforms — These companies offer platforms that enable consumers to manage their insurance and claims, including mobile apps that allow them to file claims right at the spot of the car accident.
2. Number of Companies Per Category

The bar graph above summarizes the number of companies in each Insurance Tech category to show which are dominating the current market. Currently, the Insurance Comparison/Marketplace category is leading the way with a total of 137 companies, followed by Insurance Infrastructure/Backend with 108 companies.
3. Average Company Funding By Category

The bar graph above summarizes the average company funding per Insurance Tech category. The Product Insurance category leads the way with an average of $63M per funded company. The Product Insurance companies offer insurance/warranties for products that you purchase, from tech gadgets to diamonds.
4. Venture Investing in Insurance Technology

The graph above compares total venture investing in Insurance Tech categories to the number of companies in each category. While Health Insurance has the most funding at over $1.8B, it is Comparison/Marketplace and Infrastructure/Backend categories that have the most traction in total startups. It’ll be interesting to see if the funding in these categories grows in 2016.
5. Global Breakdown of Insurance Technology

The following infographic is an updated heat map indicating where Insurance Tech startups exist across 47 countries. Currently, the United States is leading the way with 310 companies. The United Kingdom is in second with 40 companies followed by India with 18.
6. Median Age of Insurance Tech Categories

The bar graph above summarizes Insurance Tech by median age of each category. The Life & Home Insurance category is the most mature category at a median age of 18 years, while P2P Insurance is the most emerging category with a median age of 1 year.
7. Founding Date Distribution

The bar graph above shows the distribution of years in which Insurance Tech startups were founded. Over 50% of Insurance Tech startups were founded after 2011, while only 15% of the companies were founded before 2000.
8. Funding By Vintage Year

The bar graph above shows the level of funding in Insurance Tech by vintage year. Insurance Tech startups founded from 2013-Present have received $1.5 billion in funding.
9. Insurance Tech Company Headcount Distribution

The bar graph above shows the distribution of employee headcount among Insurance Tech startups. 44% of Insurance Tech companies are startups with fewer than 10 employees, indicating that this is in the early stages of innovation.
10. Top Investors in Insurance Technology

The graph above summarizes which investors invest in Insurance Tech most frequently. Currently, 500 Startups leads the way with 6 investments, followed by Y Combinator and First Round with 5 investments each.
As Insurance Technology continues to develop, so too will its moving parts. We hope this post provides some big picture clarity on this booming industry.
Venture Scanner enables corporations to research, identify, and connect with the most innovative technologies and companies. We do this through a unique combination of our data, technology, and expert analysts. If you have any questions, reach out to info@venturescanner.com.


Children’s Health Insurance Program: A Health Care Lifeline That Benefits Us All
We talk about a lot of issues in the U.S. Senate — taxes, education, ways to smartly balance the use of our natural resources and how to help everybody achieve the American Dream, to name just a few.
Each one is important and each is worthy of our attention.
But if you’re not healthy — and especially if your children aren’t healthy and they don’t have access to comprehensive, affordable health care — those matters fade in importance. The quality of health care and our ability to use it touches all of us. And that’s why we want to spend a few minutes highlighting the importance of the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) and why we and other Democrats in the Senate are locking arms tightly to make sure CHIP is here to stay.
Simply put, CHIP is a success and millions of kids are healthier because of it. CHIP is a federal-state partnership created in 1997 that provides comprehensive and affordable care to 10 million kids who in most cases are in families that earn too much income to qualify for Medicaid but too little to be able to afford private health insurance.
Every state has taken advantage of CHIP and that’s one reason the uninsured rate for children has dropped dramatically since CHIP’s enactment — from 14 percent in 1997 to a record low of 7 percent in 2012.
The program has always enjoyed bipartisan support in Congress and last year, nearly 40 governors responded to a joint request by the Senate Finance Committee and House Energy and Commerce Committee for ground-level feedback about CHIP. Support for the program was universal with Democratic and Republican governors alike praising the services CHIP provides and how it is run and managed.
But here’s the catch: Funding for CHIP runs out on Sept. 30 unless Congress acts. We can’t let that happen. That’s the reason we introduced legislation on Feb. 12 that would guarantee funding for CHIP through 2019. We’ve named the bill the “Protecting & Retaining Our Children’s Health Insurance Program (PRO-CHIP) Act of 2015.”
It’s a good bill for a great program and there isn’t time to waste. Governors have told us in no uncertain terms that they need Congress to act now because now is when most states are finalizing their budgets for the year. Congress needs to act within the next few months so both states and millions of people who depend on CHIP have certainty.
The bill we’ve introduced is a path of least resistance and one that senators from both parties can support. It essentially extends the current program — as is — through 2019. This is the same program that nine Republican senators and 40 Republican House members supported in 2009, the last time CHIP was considered by Congress. More recently, governors as diverse as Gary Herbert, a Republican from Utah and Deval Patrick, a Democrat from Massachusetts wrote to Congress last year expressing support for CHIP and urging Congress to extend it as soon as possible. And last month, former Sen. Bill Frist — a Republican, former Senate Majority Leader and a physician — tweeted this: “I fought for Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) in 1997, and Congress must extend CHIP this year.”
He’s right.
The stakes are high. With CHIP’s strong performance over the years and its bipartisan history there is no reason for delay and for doing what’s necessary to ensure that 10 million kids continue receiving the comprehensive, affordable care they need.
Wyden is the ranking Democrat on the Senate Finance Committee. Senators Brown, Stabenow and Casey are members of the Senate Finance Committee.

The Internet of Things and the End of the Auto Insurance Industry as You Know It

When Tesla and others comes out with broad production of driverless cars, the question of who’s going to insure them is not reassuring to the insurance companies. Nor are a host of other threats from new technology. Insurance firms are already getting bombarded with a digital disruption from two different directions: the Internet of Things and Big Data.
With $600B at stake in the global auto insurance business, the industry is going to be upended. When billions of Things (connected sensors) can communicate what they measure with other Things in the cloud in a constant barrage of both structured and unstructured data, the results will get funneled down into customized consumer choices that do one big thing auto insurers don’t typically do today: save you money!
At first blush, it would appear that insurers with their historical access to data and the creation of actuarial algorithms would be a natural to adapt to IoT, however, insurers have just been a bit behind. Their interaction with their customers is so infrequent that they have to wait for second order data — e.g., reported auto accidents or speeding tickets processed through the DMV, to have any visibility into client behavior and risk.
“Inertia is not loyalty. With the amount of money we each spend on insurance, it’s almost unfathomable to imagine how owning our own big data is going to change the shopping equation.” — Marty Ellingsworth, insurance expert.
An insurance company spends the most money on one category: paying for claims (65% of every premium dollar). If they’re lucky, when they subtract agent commissions, , underwriting expenses, advertising and all overhead, they are left with a 5–10% profit.
The grand strategy of insurance companies will be transformed by IoT and big data. Direct measurement of driving behavior, which can transform the way insurers make underwriting and pricing decisions, enables more rapid response after accidents, and provides forensic data for claims investigation.
IoT offers the opportunity for growth and yet also a threat to existence. The impact of this change is intuitive on its face but difficult to fathom in its fullest, most radical potential.
There are four ostensible ways to help lower your auto premium. 1) Don’t be a teenage boy — they pay through the nose because of their statistical probability of having an accident. 2) Have five years of no accidents or tickets so you are classified as a “safe driver” 3) Have a good credit score (yes, believe it or not, it matters) and 4) Get a telematics tracking device linked back to your insurer installed in your car and show that you are a safe driver, especially if you’re a teen willing to drive safely.
Telematics, which is the use of wireless devices to transmit data in real time back to an organization has been tried in the auto insurance industry for some time and is the front edge of IoT. It’s used in the context of automobiles, whereby installed or after-factory boxes collect and transmit data on vehicle use, maintenance requirements or automotive servicing.

Usage-based insurance (UBI) is a very big incentive to adopt some aspect of telematics. Insurers already use mileage as a pricing variable, but they just haven’t had a reliable way to collect actual mileage. They typically offer lower pricing for lower mileage, with 12k miles being one common threshold. The threat that any financial player armed with the technology to qualify a driver as safe has scared the insurance industry. New tech entrants like Metromile can measure a driver’s actual mileage and provide insurance based on a per-thousand mileage scale. However, safe driving habits have an even bigger role in driving UBI, or “pay as you drive” as it’s often called in Europe.
How can telematics lower your insurance premiums?
John Sundean, an insurance industry expert and former Accenture Partner says “early insurance telematics adopters have found that, in addition to total miles driven, frequent harsh braking is a powerful predictor of accidents. If an insurer can measure that then they have a keen idea of whether you’re a safe driver or not. Harsh braking is followed closely by rapid acceleration, aggressive cornering and late night driving. Telematics can measure all those factors.”
If you’re willing to go beyond privacy concerns and give insurers the right to monitor your driving performance, you have a chance to get a lower premium and save hundreds every year.
In Italy, installed telematics devices have been around for over a decade as a premier option because of the high rate of auto theft and fraud. Tracking the stolen car is one key benefit of lowering an already high premium. Insurers in the UK have always had high rates for teen drivers and have offered a lowered premium for those drivers willing to have the black boxes (about the size of a cellphone) installed in their cars. In return for a telematics record that shows safe driving, they can have their rates lowered from the $3K+ normal rate for teenage boys.
Progressive Insurance has recognized the threat of IoT and importance of telematics for over a decade and has been on the front end of the U.S. effort. After all, Progressive now bills over $2B in telematics premium in a U.S. industry who only has a 2 percent penetration. Progressive has collected over 10 billion miles of driving data with Snapshot, its Pay As You Drive program, since introducing its first wireless device in January 2008. Progressive leads the usage-based insurance (UBI) industry with two million vehicles that have participated in the program.
The company has recently entered into a partnership with GM’s OnStar that will allow owners of all 2016 GM models, most 2015 models and some 2013 and 2014 models to have their driving ability rated and get a Progressive UBI policy.
“OnStar will introduce a safe driving assessment service for its customers,” says David Pratt, Progressive’s UBI general manager. “After three months, they will send the drivers an e-mail telling them how they did and what they can do to improve. And they will send a suggestion on the insurance option.”
Progressive is betting that drivers who see how well they stack up to others will want to turn that into saving money with it. “One advantage for the customer is that he or she never has to install a device,” Pratt says. This is not only a benefit for the customer, but for the product as well. “Any technology that makes it easier for customers to participate will help UBI become mainstream,” he says.
Verizon Telematics is working with a number of insurers to track both individuals’ cars and corporate fleets. As insurance companies move into “telematics” in homes and on individuals, expect to see more partnerships being forged. State Farm and ADT, the home security company, have an alliance to apply IoT to monitor your home and vehicles in one unified offering.
There are even apps that provide similar telematics information. After all, most of the driving behavior insurers need can be measured by the accelerometer and GPS already embedded in your smartphone.
My experience using the free driving app I downloaded has been fascinating. Drivewise (from Driveway) sends me a text assessing my performance within a minute of finishing a drive. I might be rated as an “elegantly moving top gun” (score 100), “brake riding road roaster”(score 65) or cast aspersions on my ability to even safely navigate the commute home. I like the top gun status more of course, but if the app was connected to my insurance company, I’d also pay much more attention to its feedback.
As fun and impressive Driveway is, so far it only knows you’re moving. Not how. You could be a passenger in someone else’s car. Last weekend, I got a stellar rating on my driving when actually I had just finished a warm Sunday ride through the Santa Cruz Mountains on my bicycle.
The vast universe of connected Things producing Big Data allows other new entrants in the market threaten the insurance industry from offline distribution through brick-and-mortar agents and call centers to online, direct-to-consumer sales. CoverHound is a marketplace for car insurance: an easy-to-use online comparison-shopping tool and a purchasing experience on the site itself, rather than through an insurer’s clunky interface of fax and phone — or worse, the storefront agent’s office.
Insurers will need to build ‘ecosystems’ (networks of companies, individuals and institutions that interact and provide services) in order to promote, supply, install and service connected devices. Insurers also need to be mindful that there are a finite number of relevant potential partners for the new ecosystems that will shape the future of their industry. Read: Get in now or miss the boat.
From a strategic perspective, the key questions for insurers are ‘who will have the data I need in 10 years’ time?’ and ‘who will have the primary -, and more valuable — customer relationships?’
Sensors in cars will provide data about the location and usage patterns of the vehicle and therefore a more accurate fix on the risks of theft and accidents. We will be barraged with data on restaurants, stores, gas stations within our car’s vicinity with low prices, great reviews, special discounts and more galore. Data analytics have to be able to assess risk behaviors and individual profiles as telematics exabytes spill forth.
Mobility will allow driving consumers to take advantage of these offers as they roll down the road from commute to errands to schools to home with the ease of using stored payment info in a concierge offering that might be called Super-Uber…or Uber-Uber or, maybe, just plain Uber, which was capitalized last year at a value of $17B.
“Put it on my tab” will be the mantra of the connected consumer and, in particular, the connected driver.
Dealing in a transparent market in buying behaviors will disrupt many large incumbent insurers who will not go away easily. They will acquire the right players, develop their own technology and do what they can to be a survivor.
As a consumer of all things, you will be able to “opt-in” (and, yes, be very cautious about privacy intrusion) to have your data in the cloud where it’s married with data analytics and , voila, have a vast, convenient and competitively-priced marketplace of a bevy of consumer offerings. It won’t be more than a few months before drivers will perhaps be thumbing their noses at the traditional auto insurers who’ve perhaps overcharged several thousand dollars.
Imagine this! You upload your driving data onto the Internet and say, “Here’s my make, model, mileage, credit score and driving record. Bid on me!”
If any financial player is willing to be regulated like the insurance companies so that consumers are protected, then the field of entrants is wide open. The data will flow to those agile enough to turn it into savings. Who’s to say you hear back on a rate quote from State Farm or Geico or Progressive? The lowest rate might come back to you from some financial entity seemingly as far afield today as…a hedge fund?
The road is wide open. Fasten your seat belts!

Trump to Replace Health Insurance with Health Protection

The president-elect today outlined an ambitious plan to replace the Affordable Care Act with expanded access to health protection.
“Obamacare = millions of Americans w/health insurance. Sad,” Mr. Trump tweeted at 3:42 a.m. “My plan = pay $ and my sons won’t inject you w Zika.”
Mr. Trump’s plan is modeled on the infamous mob protection rackets, where mobsters would extort businesses for money in exchange for “protection” from violence, theft, and arson usually committed by the organized crime syndicate itself when owners refused to pay.
Under Mr. Trump’s plan, Americans will pay a fee in exchange for protection from diseases the Trump Organization will release on citizens who opt out of the program, via biological warfare.
“My plan = much more affordable,” the incoming president Tweeted at 4:13 a.m. “Only $10/week, collected by Eric on Wednesdays.”


As More People Sign Up for Health Insurance, America’s Health-Care Costs Go Up
Prescription drug costs also grew.
By Francie Diep
(Photo: Joe Raedle/Getty Images)
Health-care spending in the United States totaled $3.2 trillion last year, or nearly $10,000 per person, according to newly released government figures. That’s an uptick of almost 6 percent — sizable compared to the Great Recession years, but still lower than or on par with cost increases in the early 2000s.
Researchers attribute the rise, which occurred in 2014 as well, to the fact that the Affordable Care Act was finally fully implemented across the country, and with it came more people with health insurance and, consequently, more trips to the hospital and doctor’s office. Fifteen million Americans gained health insurance between 2013 and 2015.
Is Obamacare Working?
We weigh the evidence.
psmag.com
“In 2014 and 2015, we have the one-time effects of the ACA expansion,” Aaron Catlin, deputy director of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ National Health Statistics Group, said during a call for reporters.
Yet previous research from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services had suggested this won’t be a one-time thing. Based on existing health-care laws — which the upcoming Trump administration has promised to change — researchers predicted health spending would grow over the next decade by an average of about 6 percent per year and would eventually make up a little more than one-fifth of America’s economy. In 2015, health-care spending accounted for 17.8 percent of America’s gross domestic product. In 1980, it was 9 percent.
In 2015, health-care spending accounted for 17.8 percent of America’s gross domestic product.
So who is spending so much more for health care than they had before? One hard-hit payer was the federal government, which spent nearly 10 percent more on Medicaid—totaling $545 billion—than in years past. Private health insurance companies saw their costs go up too, as a result of more people having access to benefits. In addition, some research suggests those newly insured after the passage of the ACA tended to be sicker and thus costlier for insurance companies than the average insured American prior to Obamacare.
We Can Finally Cure Hepatitis C, but It’s Costing Taxpayers a Fortune
A 12-week course of treatment with the most popular drug has a list price of about $95,000, or $1,100 a day.psmag.com
Prescription drug costs also grew significantly, by 9 percent, during 2015. There were new, pricey medicines released last year, including a $1,100-a-day hepatitis C drug that vastly improved patients’ quality of life. The year 2015 also saw some companies hike the prices of their existing brand-name drugs, and was notable for its lack of patent expirations on blockbuster drugs—something that brought health-care costs down in the early 2010s with brand names like Lipitor and Plavix.
The debate that will now follow is whether this spending growth would have been even higher without Obamacare.






More (Bad) News About My 2017 Health Insurance
This story keeps getting better. I mean, worse.
Photo credit: Matthew Rutledge, CC BY 2.0.
If you remember my “everything I had to go through to get health insurance for 2017” post from last week, you might remember that I had to decide whether I wanted to continue with Premera even though my OB-GYN (the only doctor I visit regularly, for my annual Well Woman checkup) was no longer in-network.
Everything I Had to Go Through to Get Healthcare for 2017
This process has too many steps.thebillfold.com
I decided that I had very little control over whether I got to keep my OB-GYN; even if I did the work of figuring out which healthcare plan (if any) covered him, he could still retire, or move, or something could happen. Better to stick with Premera, since I’ve never had any really bad experiences and it’s also the major insurer in the area.
I didn’t think about checking to confirm which other doctors weren’t covered by my 2017 Premera plan, but it looks like there’s going to be a lot of them.
Here’s an excerpt from a letter I just received:
Over the last several months, Providence Health & Services and its partners, Swedish, PacMed and Kadlec have worked with Premera Blue Cross to sign a three-year contract for Premera Heritage Plus, an employer-sponsored health benefits plan. However, it is important that our patients know the following:
The agreement does not include Premera’s Heritage Prime plan, or Premera’s individual networks, Heritage Signature and LifeWise Connect, both of which are available on the Washington Health Benefit Exchange.
If you’re not a Seattle resident, you should understand that this is huge. I am effectively cut off from several of the major hospitals and medical facilities in the city.
So I went back and looked at my 2017 healthcare plan. If I were to visit an out-of-network provider, I would pay the full costs out-of-pocket, and my payment would neither decrease my $4,500 deductible nor my $7,150 annual out-of-pocket limit. There’s an exception for emergency services, which come with a $250 copay followed by payment out of my $4,500 deductible.
I also looked at which hospitals and medical services might still be available to me—which is not information that is very easily presented, I should tell you right now—and it looks like I’ll still be able to get medical care in Seattle, plus my local ZoomClinic is part of my plan, which should cover a lot of the care I anticipate needing (and help connect me to other healthcare services in my network as necessary).
So this isn’t a complete disaster.
But it’s still information I would have liked to have a month ago.

Partnering with SafeShare to create the Ad-hoc Insurance of the Sharing Economy

The sharing economy presents different challenges to those of the rental sector. Traditional insurance excludes property damages by paying guests and household insurance does not cover damage from third parties, amongst other limitations.
Slock.it’s technology enables anything from lockers to villas to be rented in an ad-hoc, peer to peer fashion, hopefully one day on the Universal Sharing Network. For small items, the built-in deposit system will be often sufficient, but for higher value property, such as vehicles, office spaces or apartments, we have partnered with SafeShare to provide future users of the Universal Sharing Network with a leading insurance product.
Because it supports almost any use case in so many countries, SafeShare is an ideal partner for Slock.it
With SafeShare, Universal Sharing Network smart contracts will be able to offer a revolutionary , universal, on-the-spot insurance where users pay only for the type of insurance they need, when they need it. The insurance provider will read from the Ethereum blockchain when the objects are rented out, and owners will only pay for the time the property was required.
The simplicity and elegance of the implementation of the insurance mechanism prototype we are developing with SafeShare would surprise many — it is worlds away from the horribly expensive, slow to implement SOA frameworks from traditional integrators. In many respect, it’s a perfect example of how blockchain technology creates new business opportunities while reducing the cost of operations for the companies that adopt it.
We encourage you to learn more about SafeShare and their amazing team on their website: http://safeshareinsurance.com/

About the Author
Stephan Tual is the Founder and COO of Slock.it.
Previously CCO for the Ethereum project, Stephan has three startups under his belt and brings 20 years of enterprise IT experience to the Slock.it project. Before discovering the Blockchain, Stephan held CTO positions at leading data analytics companies in London with clients including VISA Europe and BP.
His current focus is on the intersection of blockchain technology and embedded hardware, where autonomous agents can transact as part of an optimal Internet of Things economy.
Twitter: @stephantual
Contact: stephan@slock.it
If you enjoyed reading this, please log in and click “Recommend” below.
This will help to share the story with others.

CoverWallet: Reinventing business insurance with new investors and executives
We just raised $7.8M & added Jim Ermilio as President of Insurance

We have some exciting things to share.
I am delighted to announce our Series A round of $7.8M which will help us continue to build an online insurance company optimized for today’s busy business owner. The round, led by Union Square Ventures, included new investor Index Ventures, and previous investors Highland Capital Partners, Two Sigma Ventures and Founder Collective. In addition, we are announcing that seasoned executive Jim Ermilio is joining CoverWallet as President of Insurance.
This comes just a few weeks after being selected as one of the most entrepreneurial companies in America by Entrepreneur360.
Why we are excited about this announcement:
We’re welcoming two new investors that have an incredible track record of partnering with tech startups to reinvent (or create) large markets: Union Square Ventures (investors in Twitter, Indeed, Duolingo, LendingClub, Zynga, FundingCircle, Tumblr, MongoDB, or Twilio) and Index Ventures (investors in Dropbox, CundyCrush, Slack, Transferwise, Metromile, Wealthfront, or Skype). Index’s investment was led by Ilya Fushman, a partner at Index and a personal friend.
John Buttrick, a partner at Union Square Ventures, has joined our board. John led USV investments in successful financial services startups such as FundingCircle, LendingClub, RealtyShares, SigFig and C2FO.
Jim Ermilio, previously CEO of online auto insurance company Goji and Executive Vice President and General Counsel at Commerce Insurance (acquired for over $2B), has joined as President of Insurance. We are extremely fortunate because it is rare to find a successful executive with experience in tech, insurance and startups, and Jim brings that unique combination.
Big Opportunity in Insurance for Product & Customer-Centric Driven Organizations
At CoverWallet we combine data, design and technology to simplify how businesses deal with their insurance needs.
When I talk to executives from the insurance industry, it seems they all agree that customers feel that dealing with insurance is analog and frustrating. The industry needs to use design and technology to develop customer-centric online products and simplify the user experience.
But only a few of them walk the walk. I am always surprised to hear from some insurance executives that you shouldn’t make it too easy for a customer to shop for policies digitally. Their suggestion is that “you need to make it painful upfront to identify who is a real buyer” (!!). Other executives may tell you that they are committed to building simple and beautiful experiences for the customers, but when you ask how many product designers (graphic designers, interaction designers, usability managers, information architects, analytics managers) they have on payroll the answer is 0 (as a note, so far we have 3 UI designers at Coverwallet).
I have even heard from an executive that customers don’t care about an easy and elegant experience because they need the insurance and will go through whatever experience you put them through. They neglect any prioritization or resource allocation to good product design.

This is where the opportunity is. Research shows that new billion dollar companies generally reinvent existing behavior with a superior consumer experience based on data, design and technology, rather than bringing something radical and novel to the market. Morgan Stanley and BCG forecast that 20% of the insurance industry is going to move online, meaning that product-focused organizations, with design and technology in their DNA, have a great chance to reinvent the industry and capture this opportunity. So far, we are fortunate to have partnered with a handful of insurance companies who understand that the world is changing and you need to move forward in order to remain relevant.
“Insurers know that many small businesses in the US will eventually buy insurance directly online. What insurers don’t appreciate is how fast this shift is likely to happen”, Morgan Stanley / BCG report, Apr 2016
When I look back, I am impressed by the quality of individuals and firms who have joined CoverWallet so far, starting with my cofounder Rashmi Melgiri, and including employees, advisors, investors and partners, and I feel extremely fortunate. And I’m excited for the next twelve months, as we continue developing the tech platform, growing the team and the metrics, and reinventing this large industry, to simplify the life of every business owner.

Fixing insurance distribution: three schools of approach
I have met a lot of insuretech businesses over the last couple of years, mostly in Europe but with a burst in the US around Insuretech Connect
The majority of these businesses are trying to find a new way to reach and acquire customers (be they consumers or businesses). There are a bunch of other interesting areas in insurance around software, claims management, fraud, capital structure, broker tools etc. — but I will save that for another post.
Any VC looking across many companies in a sector needs to find a way to impose structure and differentiate between approaches. This can be tough as there are lot of common threads.

Many companies talk to me about their use of machine learning; new data sources; flexible SaaS platforms; ability to iterate product much more rapidly than incumbents and mobile-first approach. Many companies want to start with a broker model and evolve to an MGA, often involving partnering with a reinsurer (usually Munich Re, but others are catching up). Most companies want to improve the claims process. No-one wants to rely on adwords for acquisition.
What I try to do is find important axes on which startups differ. Lots of ways to look at this but I find myself coming back to the following:
Concierge vs. Bundling vs. Pull
One school of startups want to become your trusted concierge for all your insurance needs. Insurance is a world that most of us don’t fully understand, and we want to outsource decision making to a third party. Once they have built our trust we will happily buy all our insurance through them, creating long lifetimes, and amortizing acquisition cost across many different products.
The second school of startups see this as wishful thinking. They see insurance as a low-engagement purchase which is almost always triggered by a major purchase or life event. The obvious way to sell such a product is by bundling it in at point of purchase. Any other acquisition channel will over time become too expensive (who sells warranties as a standalone product?). If they resist the temptation to reduce coverage or jack up prices every year they should be able to fix for high churn.
The third, and smallest, school believe that you can get people to care enough about insurance that they will buy it proactively — pull not push.
None of the above schools is proven, and the right answer probably varies by line of business. Going into each of them in more depth:
Concierge
This is obviously the original insurance broker model, which continues to be strong in many countries and globally in business insurance.
The first disruption here was the price comparison websites, which work really well for ‘grudge purchase’ price-focussed insurance (e.g. car and home). There is still plenty of mileage in PCWs. The UK and Germany are the only large mature markets, with multiple $B+ businesses created: Moneysupermarket, Check24, Confused and Compare the Market. The US market is evolving rapidly here with the likes of Coverhound and Compare.com. CompareAsia and CompareEurope are rolling out rapidly across markets. Starting to get traction in SMB sector as well with the lies of SimplyBusiness.
The next evolution of this is the ‘online advisor’ which takes a more detailed look at your personal circumstances and recommends what cover you should and shouldn’t have, then helps you buy it. PolicyGenius seem to be making this work well for life insurance. Embroker and Coverwallet are taking on the SMB market.

Taking that a step further are the ‘mobile insurance wallets’ such as Financefox, Knip, Safe, Brolly and Clark. They start by pulling all your insurance policies into one place, then they make personalised recommendations to you to improve your cover. Currently fairly manually but automating and adding AI over time.
The end game would be an AI that could pull all your insurance together in one place, optimise it on your behalf, and only ask for the occasional approval (“Congratulations on your new baby Rob. I would recommend to increase your life insurance by 25%”). Or it could be an ‘umbrella’ policy covering all your risks in a more cost-effective way.
The common challenges in this area are:
Insurers being uncooperative. Mostly as they are protecting their broker channels. Also as they worry about being commoditised. Need to show them the potential for real revenue upside.
Building consumer trust in a cost-effective way. Requires a perfect product, over-communication, and a bit of brand-building
Maintaining that trust over time. Claims process is vital, as is price transparency and competitiveness
Bundling
In this model insurance is bundled in at point of sale. The art (and science) is in making this as smooth as possible, to maximise conversion rate and size of sale. An analogy I use here is PSPs such as Adyen and Stripe, which have taken share from the likes of first-gen PSPs such as Worldpay. The other opportunity is in expanding PoS insurance to new categories.
The first big category here has been extended warranties and product insurance, which made Asurion and Assurant big companies. Simplesurance are the leading European player.

The real stand out player so far is Zhong An who have achieved phenomenal traction for their return shipping insurance through Taobao and Tmall: Four billion policies sold since they started in 2013.
Travel insurance has been a lucrative area for OTAs, but has often been done through direct partnerships with insurers. Covermore probably the biggest player, with newer entrants including Hepstar and Covergenius.
Other sectors are opening up for this as they move the purchase online. Cross-selling insurance offline was tricky as it involved paperwork and an untrained person giving regulated advice. Online channels really open this up. It will be fascinating to see what online new car sales and connected cars do to sales of auto insurance at point of purchase. Several of the big auto manufacturers seem to be gearing up for this.
The other opportunity opening up is cross-selling insurance through employee portals and benefits providers. Zenefits the obvious example but others such as Alan in France will be interesting to watch
The biggest challenge for the bundlers is competitive differentiation. What stops their partners shopping around every two years for lowest margins? Can they find exclusive pricing, build an ‘intel inside’ type brand, or create a portable profile for users? Can they build the widest and fastest set of integrations with insurers’ back ends? Can they build new products that stand out from the crowd?
The other challenge is avoiding the temptation to slip into selling poor or expensive insurance products. PPI insurance sales in the UK are a cautionary tale.
Pull
This is the most ambitious and hardest model.

Trov is the stand out example to date, with $46M of funding. Their aim is to bring millennials into the insurance world by getting them to insure the products they love with a mobile app experience that they also love. However recent comments by the CEO that they are also building a platform for other insurers seem to indicate a desire to hedge against this not working out.
Lemonade is the other obvious example, offering a strong price and great on-boarding experience to woo young people into buying renters insurance.
The best circumstance for any pull model is a market disruption that generates renewed interest in insurance. Oscar benefitted here from Obamacare. Telematics car insurance benefitted from soaring premiums for young drivers. Cyberinsurance is the current hot category in business insurance.
The challenge is obvious — getting customers to care. We need to always remember that insurance is a long way down most people’s to-do list.
I am agnostic on which of the above will produce the next $B success story. All three approaches have potential and am interested to hear from European insurtech startups in all of them (and from those which are hard to categorise).

My Fuck Off Fund Is Insurance Against My Own Good Intentions
It’s there to sort of save me from myself.
Photo: Unsplash
Talking at length about how busy you are is a surefire way to prune your friend group without doing any of the work. One conversation about how the week is really packed easily slides into a ceaseless monologue, a logorrhea about nothing particularly interesting to anyone else except yourself. I find myself checking this tendency often. I work a lot of hours and my free time is limited; the former is a point of pride tempered with a dose of reality and the latter is perhaps my main source of stress.
Working makes me money. Money makes it so that I can live my life in the manner I’d like to live it. Burnout prevents me from living my life to its fullest and is a direct result of the amount of work I do. As an insurance policy against my inevitable collapse, when my left eye twitch takes over my entire face or when I finally snap, I cultivate my fuck off fund as valuable insurance against my own good intentions.
If left to my own devices and faced with a future of financial uncertainty, I will schedule more work than I can comfortably do in order to stave off the panic that comes from never having work again. Freelancing means that the work could suddenly stop; it is imperative to do all the work I can while I have it, so that when I don’t, my time is less panicked and more restorative.
Right now, I have about $18,789 in my second checking account and $717 in my actual, brand-new savings account. That’s my Fuck Off Fund, my Fuck I Have To Pay Taxes Fund, my I’d Love To Take A Month Off Sometime Eventually Fund. It’s the whole banana stand. It’s the insurance policy I’ve built from the ground up, money that I can use in the case of an emergency. It’s a Fuck Off Fund that I can use when I need to tell myself to fuck off from work if I need to for my own sanity.
Not working makes me anxious because it makes me consider my usefulness. I like keeping busy and participating in the elaborate system required to make money in order to live. I like money. I like having it and I like the security it embodies: If I have money, I have freedom. I can move in the world in a way that works for me and the money I’ve made will allow me to do so. That, in its own right, is the point of a Fuck Off Fund: to be able to have the freedom to wriggle out from under the thumb of whatever exterior force is preventing you from living your life to the fullest. It’s not always that easy, but sometimes throwing money at a problem is the simplest solution. Having money to throw at that problem, whether it be burnout or a broken computer or a sprained ankle, is a privilege. It’s something I never thought I’d have. And now, somehow, I do.
I could work less — drop a job or an assignment here and there and free up time for myself to do whatever it is I need to do — but I find it very hard to turn down work that I am capable of doing, regardless of whether or not I have the time. An easy assignment for $200, something that will take me maybe two hours, is hard to turn down. Adding it to the pile and forging ahead, even though the pile is already starting to collapse under its own weight, is easy. It’s money in the bank. It’s something that makes my imagined time away from work that much easier. A bill will get paid because I do this work; I will be able to breathe easy for one extra day. I won’t have to open my laptop. I will pretend the internet and its attendant crises have fallen into the Great Pacific Garbage Patch, never to be seen again. I will float on for another day, buoyed by the money I’ve saved, quietly telling myself to fuck off.
This week, we’re celebrating the Fuck Off Fund. This story is part of this series.

Circle Medical brings transparency to healthcare with real time insurance verification
Effective today, you can now use the Circle Medical app to get real time data about your health insurance simply by scanning your insurance card or manually entering your member ID.
We consistently hear from our patients that insurance is hard to understand, and this is only one step towards bringing more transparency to healthcare costs. As far as we know, Circle Medical is the first primary care practice to make this information so easy to access at the point of care *before* booking an appointment.
How to check your insurance
Download Circle Medical for iOS or Android if you haven’t already.
Create an account. This creates a HIPAA-compliant electronic health record for you where your personal and medical information will be stored securely.
Scan your insurance card and confirm your name, gender and date of birth.
What the app will tell you
Whether your plan is currently active and in network with Circle Medical.
Your copay for office visits.
Your deductible and how much of it you’ve spent to date.

Insurance eligibility currently works for California-based patients with PPO, EPO and select HMO plans from Aetna, Anthem Blue Cross, Blue Shield, Cigna, Health Net and UnitedHealthcare.
There’s no cost to download Circle Medical and check your insurance. And if you live in the San Francisco Bay Area, you can book a doctor who will come to your home or work for the same copay as a traditional doctor’s office.
As always, we’d love to hear your feedback, questions or concerns. You can provide them to us via email (info at circlemedical.com), or secure in-app chat.


HOLY SHIT. I’m losing my ACA Marketplace Insurance Plan in 30 days.

I am one of 200,000 New Yorkers who recently discovered my Health Republic plan is going under in 2016. I’ve been scrambling to find a new plan that covers my doctors.
About Me: I am a disability advocate. My advocacy aims to ease the stigma of products used by people with disabilities. I believe a reduction in stigma will save countless lives. I am also a trained Navigator and will be spending a better part of November volunteering for Community Health Advocates helping my fellow New Yorkers understand their marketplace options… yet I cannot seem to navigate my own healthcare situation.
Here is a recent post about my health insurance experience:
My Health Insurance Just Shut Down Operations. I’m Scared.
But HOLY SHIT.
This was just released by New York State (on Friday, October 29th):
However, a subsequent NYDFS and CMS-led review of Health Republic’s finances has found that the company’s financial condition is substantially worse than the company previously reported in its filings to NYDFS. In light of these developments, NYDFS and the NYSOH Marketplace have determined that it is in the best interest of consumers to end all Health Republic policies — both individual and small group — on November 30, 2015 so that customers can transition to new coverage after that date.
I’m losing my health insurance in 30 days and I don’t know what to do.
I only have 15 days to select a new plan.
I live with chronic illness and disability. I see my doctors at least weekly. There is no other plan that carries my entire medical team (3 doctors). This honestly could kill me. I can’t be any more clear. I need help. Somebody needs to step in to ensure those who require continuity of care get it. How could this have happened?
Update: I just received the following (and incredibly warm) message from my contact at Health Republic. Remember this is someone who is in the process of losing her job.
They’re shutting us down… We will no longer provide or have insurance after November.
On Monday, I will send over any information I can gather. I am almost positive the NY exchange will have additional assistance available as well as support from DFS… Remain optimistic. You may be able to keep the providers you’re currently visiting for a bit of time after our “doors have closed”.
This may be insanity, and it certainly seems… Unjust… But keep in mind, everything happens for a reason. This door may be closing just as another will be opening.
11/1/15 UPDATE: Knowing I only have 15 days to select a new plan, I logged into NY State of Health as soon as the new marketplace plans went up this morning and discovered I’m locked out. Due to a glitch from 2013, I have two separate accounts. I was assured this was fixed, it’s not.
The account I use says this:

The other account says this:

NYState of Health offices are closed on Sundays. Guess I only have 14 days.
11/2/15 UPDATE: There was a series of Marketplace outages today meaning New Yorkers struggled to get logged on and start shopping. It is also becoming increasingly evident that most Health Republic insurees have yet to be notified they need to sign up for new coverage in just 13 days.
The plan is discontinuing 11/30, not 12/31.
11/3/15 UPDATE: I am now logged onto the New York Marketplace. I found a plan that could work, it’s an Oscar plan as I assumed would be the case. Unfortunately while both of my doctors assure me they accept Oscar, I was unable to locate either of them in Oscar’s doctor search.

Furthermore, I still have not received official notification from Health Republic, which means the majority of Health Republic insurees remain unaware they need to select a new plan in 12 days. I thought the Marketplace would have a warning, but this was the best I got:

11/3/15 Another UPDATE: This is a fiasco. I just spoke with my contact at New York State of Health. She informed me I was no longer eligible for subsidies on any marketplace plans (I receive $285 a month in subsidies because I am on SSD). I became Medicare eligible on 6/1 and turned down Medicare Part B. At the time I was happy with my Health Republic plan and didn’t want to lose my medical team. There were (and are) no Medicare plans that cover all my doctors.
In order for me to receive my subsidies, I need to get rid of Medicare Part A. I was forced onto Medicare Part A. And to get rid of Part A means I will need to also come off of Social Security Disability, which is my source of income and how I pay for my healthcare.
To get back onto Medicare part B, I will need to pay a steep penalty every month for the rest of my life because I declined it in the first place. But none of my doctors accept the same Medicare plan.
I need help.
11/4/14 UPDATE: I received an unexpected and incredibly warm call from a nurse at Oscar Health. She understood the importance of continuity of care regarding mental health physicians. She knew how strong and influential a psychologist and patient bond can be, especially in patients with chronic conditions. So she said Oscar would be more than happy to cover my out of network psychologist. I had chosen Oscar because they covered my two other doctors (my Neurologist and General Practitioner).
Unfortunately the nurse told me Oscar and New York Presbyterian are parting ways. This means my GP and Neurologist will no longer be covered by Oscar in 2016. New York Presbyterian is renowned for being one of the top ten best hospitals in the world, the best in NYC and yet it won’t be covered by an NYC health insurance plan. There are no other Marketplace plans that cover both my GP and my Neurologist. So even had I been an Oscar insuree from day one, I still would be losing continuity of care come 2016.
I also learned I am not eligible for New York’s new and affordable Essential Plan because I am Medicare eligible. And lastly, I am not eligible for Medicaid, though a Medicaid SpendDown plan might be an option (that is, if it doesn’t cost me more than a Marketplace plan without the subsidies).
11/6/15 UPDATE: First, it just came to my attention that the shuttering of Health Republic means there are now no Marketplace plans that cover Memorial Sloane Kettering, which is the best cancer hospital in the world.

In regards to my personal story. I just had a conversation with a Medicare expert. Apparently there have not been any data matches between Medicare and Marketplace plans because a system was in place to notify Health Republic that I (unwillingly) became eligible for Medicare Part A. Having Medicare Part A means I have the minimal required coverage, and come tax time I am S.O.L. How this is my fault that the system wasn’t properly set up? Not entirely sure… but I think I’m about to get a lot broker.
Because I’m already in this precarious tax situation, my new Medicare expert friend urged me not to re-run my Marketplace application, as re-running it might cause the system to match data and take away the subsidies that I currently am shown that I’m eligible for. Taking advantage of this systemic flaw will mean I can receive coverage for the month of December from Oscar (even if it will make my tax situation even worse).

As I was emailing with my new Medicare expert friend, I received a call from my (incredibly kind) contact at New York State of Health asking me to reach out before the end of the day so we can re-run my application and start looking into Medicaid Spend Down options. I’m not sure what I am going to do yet. But I am so grateful to see there may be an enrollment extension in the works.
I’m also thrilled to announce that I got a call from Senator Carlucci’s office. David Carlucci is my favorite Senator in New York because he brought the Accessible Icon to New York State. He is passionate both about People with Disabilities and easing Mental Health stigma. It relieves me to no end knowing this is now on his radar.

Please check out my list of #AffordableCareAsks (and please feel free to get in touch and submit your own).
11/7/15 UPDATE: The New York Times is covering my story!

11/7/15 Another UPDATE: If you can make sense of this Tweet, you will discover you have until November 30th to select a new plan for December.

Click here for the entire Twitter conversation. Took me a while to understand, but basically it would be difficult to notify users, via the New York State of Health website that they would need to indicate they were applying through a Special Enrollment Period (SEP) instead of an Open Enrollment period (OEP). And to have users facing an SEP alongside an OEP might be confusing. So, instead New York state is telling all Health Republic insurees they have until the November 15th (taking 15 enrollment days away from consumers) to avoid confusion.
11/7/15 UPDATE: New York state is stepping in. The official November 15th deadline has been moved back to November 30th. There will be an application hotline for those applying after the 15th. There will be steps put in place that allow Health Republic consumers to continue coverage at New York Presbyterian and Memorial Sloane Kettering for up to a year, since no other marketplace plan covers NYP or MSK.
But it still doesn’t resolve the Medicare issues that came to light through this ordeal. I am still virtually uninsurable as of 2016 and will have to ‘trick the system’ to maintain coverage for the month of December.
My focus for the week of 11/9/15 will be dis-enrollment from Medicare Part A without losing my SSD benefits so I can maintain continuity of care.
Update 11/9/2015: I received the below message from my friend Barry. Barry has a condition a lot like mine, though his actually has a name. CIDP. In reading this, you will notice two things. First, Barry is a tried and true Texas Republican (I am neither). Second, the desire to opt out of Medicare Part A crosses partisan lines.
I saw this in the Times today and I share your frustration. I’m facing similar problems. Since I’ve been granted SSDI (which I was contractually required to apply for under my contract with my private disability insurer), I’m required to enroll in Medicare. Never mind that I don’t want Medicare because it provides worse coverage of my IVIG therapy (at a greater cost to me, out of pocket) than I could get from a private insurer. It amazes me that the government forces me to accept its “benefit,” even when I’d be much better off (as would the taxpayers) without it.
Meanwhile, since it’s illegal for me to buy group health insurance through the Texas bar, I also can’t insure my wife and kids that way. So they’re stuck with the ACA exchange policies, none of which is accepted by their doctors. So now we’re scrambling to find a new pediatrician and a new endocrinologist for my son, who’s a type 1 diabetic and sees his doctor very frequently. If we can’t manage that by January — and we’ve been trying for over a month, now — our only option will be to take him to the ER for his routine diabetes care, which happens, on average, twice a month. He’ll miss a full day of school, my wife will miss a day of work, and the cost will be many times what it would be under a rational system.
It’s hard to argue that the pre-Obamacare system made much sense, but it’s also hard to argue this is much better. At least the old system didn’t come with a trillion dollar price tag.
Note, BTW, that I’ve been practicing law for 11 years and I nonetheless find the Medicare rules as opaque as if they were written in ancient Sumerian. How an average senior can be expected to navigate them is beyond me.
11/11/15 UPDATE: I am speaking with a wonderful representative at The Medicare Rights Center who is helping me figure out the best Part B plan to enroll in. Our agreed upon first step was something I was not comfortable doing, but I had to ask my Psychologist to become a Medicare provider. The rep at MRC suggested I provide this form to my Psychologist and she is currently reviewing and considering it.
In speaking with my psychologist about this, I listed off a variety of reasons I thought she may not be comfortable becoming a Medicare provider. As she is good at her job, she doesn’t let on her thinking, but I can’t imagine I’m far off. The main reason was, I never see elderly people come and go from her office. It is probably not her specialty. Most of her patients are my age. How does a psychologist attract clientele within one’s specialty? This is something this whole experience has made me feel very curious about.
Another thing I’ve become curious about? Why, when you Google ‘Medicare’ and click on images are the only people you see elderly? What about me? Young Medicare recipients? I don’t feel like this system is made for me.
11/13/15 UPDATE: My psychologist reviewed the materials and decided not to become a Medicare provider. I feel both scared shitless and more dedicated than ever to maintaining my medical team and advocating for a Medicare opt out for SSD recipients. But currently, things feel very dire and I’m I worry it’s going to make me sick.
11/14/15 UPDATE: During tonight’s Democratic Debate, Hillary Clinton said we need to find ways to improve the ACA.
Dear Brian Fallon, Stephanie Hannon, Jennifer Palmieri, Hillary for Iowa,Christina Reynolds, Ginger Lew, Karen Finney, Jess Morales Rocketto, Ann O’Leary, and David Plouffe I could not agree more and would love her support in making changes so Medicare/Marketplace plans work for me.

11/17/15 UPDATE: I still haven’t resolved anything and have started to fall into a depression caused by my inability to secure a plan that covers my psychologist. Is this a Catch-22 or just hell?
11/18/15 UPDATE: My psychologist will not be eligible for any Medicare PPO plans because she is not a contracted provider. Isn’t a PPO, by nature, supposed to cover doctors that aren’t contracted? So frustrated. I had gotten my hopes up about this plan.
12/3/15 UPDATE: Things just took a really bad turn. I just heard from the Medicare Rights Center and Senator Gillibrand’s Office, and the SSA denied my equitable relief request that they submitted on my behalf. They were shocked and I’m floored. I am now ineligible both for Medicare and for Marketplace Subsidies.
12/7/15 UPDATE: Today is the Medicare enrollment deadline. It will pass without me.
12/22/15 UPDATE: I just received a letter from Health Republic stating I owe $608.48. They will not pay my provider’s final claim until I pay this amount. I wrote a post in May detailing a billing issue that I believed had been resolved. It had not been resolved. When I try to call the provided number, it’s incredibly difficult to get through to customer service. And when I do get through to customer service, they immediately transfer me to The New York State Department of Financial Services. It’s mind boggling. I canNOT figure out how to resolve this issue to get my doctor paid. I worry this could hurt my credit.
12/29/15 UPDATE: Grandma’s Advice came in the mail:

1/19/16 UPDATE: It’s been a little while since my last update. I’m so grateful that Oscar and my psychologist came to an out of network coverage agreement, so I get to keep my doctor. I still am not receiving subsidies. This means that even though my neurologist is covered (until April when Oscar drops New York Presbyterian) I can’t afford to go. In other random news, I was invited to The White House to speak about my advocacy (unrelated to insurance woes) and brought my letter from Nonie were I to perchance run into the President. I didn’t run into the President. But here’s the video of my speech (my first ever public talk) at The White House:


New Evidence That Obamacare Helped Millions of Kids Get Health Insurance
A new analysis finds the rate of uninsured kids in America fell by almost half since the Affordable Care Act was passed.
By Francie Diep
(Photo: Mario Villafuerte/Getty Images)
Since Obamacare took effect, many more children in the United States have gotten health insurance, according to a new analysis. In 2008, 9 percent of kids under the age of 18 in America — that’s 6.9 million children — didn’t have health insurance. By 2015, that number had fallen to 3.5 million children, or 5 percent of the country’s kids. Children from families just above poverty level tended to see the biggest gains, but children of all income levels saw improvement recently.
The provisions of Obamacare were mostly designed to help low-income adults—not kids—get health insurance. Children were already covered by Medicaid and by the Children’s Health Insurance Program, which was established in 1997. But the Affordable Care Act may still have helped cover some kids, one of the analysis’ authors, public-policy researcher Joan Alker of Georgetown University wrote last year. Some children may have benefited from a marketplace plan. Others might have gotten insurance because the act lowered the premiums low-income parents in some states had to pay to cover their older kids.
The numbers come at a time when the Affordable Care Act is suffering from rising costs and from major insurers pulling out of the individual marketplace. Hillary Clinton has proposed changes to the law, while Donald Trump has promised to repeal it altogether. What these changes will mean for the coverage rates for kids remains to be seen.







Making insurance human again.
I believe insurance is exciting. I kind of hope you disagree; at least, I’m aware many do. I have rather a unique perspective I think. Let me start from there.
Monetary insurance as we know it, is, in fact, centuries old and its basis, trust, is even older. Mutual aid (a second strand of insurance), the theory that if my house burns down, my neighbours will help rebuild, and I theirs, underpins the core of what insurance is, and can even be said to form a vital tool of society.
Both insurance types have common traits. They’ve evolved through necessity, through the experience that bad stuff happens, and when it does we do something, commit to something, to reduce the pain, suffering or financial loss should it happen again. An obvious example might be the Great Fire of London in 1666. The destruction of 13,000 homes in 4 days very quickly led to fire insurance becoming a far more urgent product. An insurance office was included in Sir Christopher Wren’s rebuilding plans the next year and sometime after that, 5000 homes were insured with a primitive form of fire insurance offering the promise of reimbursement in the event of total loss through fire.
When I think about insurance I think of it as a feeling, an emotion. It’s about sensing that I’m safe in the event of ‘the worst’ happening. It’s an assurance that I’ll be looked after, that I can care for my family and that my investments are protected if we are unfortunate enough to suffer a catastrophic event, something beyond our control. I rely on a financial institution offering me protection for a price. Like us all, I’m paying for my assured, confident, organised emotion. I’m in control.
The reality is I’m not in control, I don’t feel organised and I’m not confident. For me, insurance is broken.
I’ve been on the receiving end of those unfortunate events and it didn’t work. I lived in a flat in south London that was broken into, a simple thing really; thieves kicked the door in, ransacked the place and stole everything. Despite the fact that the windows were untouched, my insurance provider refused to pay — my fault, I’d replaced a window lock with a more modern version. On that basis — despite the windows being locked and completely secure, there was no payout. The lock wasn’t the right type, they told me. It was a horrific experience my family went through. I can still remember the emotions as clearly as if it were today. It wasn’t the last time I’d feel let down by insurance.
When I first came across insurance I was probably about 6 and it confused me. My Dad ran a small Life and Pensions company. He was an IFA, part of a wider family business of insurance brokers. He’d often ask me to fetch ‘risk data’ from a big room of files. I asked him one day what risks were, as my only other experience of the word came from the board game I’d discovered through my boyish love of anything war related, that or falling off the climbing frame. My dad explained risks were files containing information about people that had purchased policies. I remember being dismissed, as an inquisitive child often is, when I asked him why he didn’t call them people. His response ran along the lines of “It’s just the way it is, they are risks”.
It didn’t make much sense then, but neither did a lot of things. I was 6.
Maybe this is where things might have gone awry. I understand it of course, but calling customers ‘risks’ feels wrong. It distances everything from the fact that at the bottom of the risk is a person, a family, all of whom, like me, rely on their insurance. We buy a product in the hope we will never need it, purchased as it is for an emotional feeling and the reassurance of security.
A few years later, in my adolescent teens, I remember being stopped in the street by a man whom I’d never met before. He asked how I was, how my Dad was, and this wasn’t the first time that had happened. You see, over the years my family had built a business that insured not an insignificant proportion of my hometown, and many people knew me, not personally but as a relative of the people that looked after their insurance.
There was a simple exchange happening in that brief conversation. Someone from the company my family owned, possibly a relative of mine, talked to that person regularly. That discussion was about the family, the home in which it lived, the possessions within it. It was a friendly exchange, sometimes even done over a coffee in the front room. There’d be talk about the local area, the car, home, family, pets, holiday destinations. Hopes for children could be discussed as well as health problems. In fact, lives would be opened and in return, my family’s business would provide advice and guidance on how to best ensure the right products were purchased. Most customers didn’t even know the name of the company insuring them; they didn’t need to. All was taken care of. If there was a problem, any problem, they called and if they didn’t call, we’d check on them regularly. Being a local broker, of course, helped; the business also knew the local plumber, the local electrician, the local builders, and probably did their insurance too.
When I was stopped in the street, it was an extension of that conversation. Customers felt they knew me too. Of course, being a grumpy adolescent teenager at the time, I didn’t understand and was probably more worried about the batteries in my walkman. It happened a lot, I got used to it.
For many reasons in the last 50 years insurance has changed. People have become busier and there’s less time for the regular catch up. The final disconnect, I believe, between customers and the personal, emotional interaction was the advent of comparison. Price became the biggest motivator, and people accepted buying direct as the norm. The experience was simplified. However, cheaper deals meant less interaction, and the emotions never went away.
I’ll admit I’m not as organised as I should be. I get by, do the minimum, but there’s a constant feeling that I could be more in control, that I’m about to get bitten because I’ve omitted to do something I probably should have. I feel as though I never know when something is coming, I have a rough idea of course, but ask me when my MOT is due and I probably won’t know without looking it up. It’s probably in the pile of paperwork that’s sitting in my kitchen, the one I really should be sorting out tonight!
For me, I wish I had that personal service, I don’t really have time for a coffee though and I’d be suspicious of anyone who wanted to come round and talk to me these days. But I haven’t forgotten the service that my family provided. I wish someone was helping me take care of it all. I’ve got more insurance, but it’s a huge hassle getting quotes from everywhere when it all runs out.
My family sold the business in the end. Back then, the technology simply didn’t exist to scale such a customer focused approach efficiently and the drive for lower prices made the long-term future seem less viable.
In the last year, I’ve been lucky enough to have been given the opportunity to build something that evoked many memories from those childhood days. It’s a new product, a product that offers the benefits of reminding me when I need to do something, fetches all my policies (with a little help), finds me a good deal and helps me make sure I’m covered for the things I need. It’s a product that will, over time, learn more about my family and will then use the knowledge of all its customers, and the market, to let me know if there’s something that might be useful to me. It’s a product that is independent of insurers, built by people that know what insurance really should be, and who want to put the emotion back.
I’m not alone here. The single biggest innovation in the industry in recent years is the realisation that customers come first; they’re calling it service, but that’s better than risk.
The product we’re building? It’s called Simples. It’s exciting — I’d love it if you’d take a look and let me know if we’re getting it right.

It’s Time to Play “How Much More Will Health Insurance Cost Next Year?”
Everybody’s a winner!
Photo credit: Clever Cupcakes, CC BY 2.0.
Last year, my Bronze health insurance plan increased its monthly premiums by 12 percent ($219.38 to $245.69). My deductible stayed the same, at $5,250, and my out-of-pocket maximum was $6,100.
You might remember me going over all of these numbers last fall:
Open Enrollment Has Started, and My Options Are Worse This Year
We’re three days into the Affordable Care Act Open Enrollment, and I am already unhappy with my choices.thebillfold.com
All care except for my annual wellness exam comes out of my deductible first; once that’s paid down, I’ll pay 20 percent of the cost and my provider will pay the other 80. I hit my out-of-pocket maximum at $6,100.
In other words, I’m paying $2,948.28 over the course of the year for the privilege of only having to pay $6,100 towards any medical costs.
Well, fall’s back, and so are rising health insurance costs. Here’s a letter I received from my health insurance provider:

I like how this letter—like so many aspects of health insurance—is unnecessarily confusing. One sentence reads “we won’t offer the health insurance coverage you currently have,” and another reads “Premera is continuing to offer your health coverage for the next year.”
The letter also advises me to visit WAHealthPlanFinder.org to learn more about my new health plan options, but after going through the trouble of logging into WAHealthPlanFinder and choosing a new password that didn’t contain any dictionary words (which, cOm3 @n), I learned that WAHealthPlanFinder hadn’t made its 2017 information available, and that I should check back.
Then I went to Premera’s website and found exactly what I was looking for: next year, my Bronze plan’s monthly premium will increase by 19 percent to $293.08, and I’ll have two deductibles: $4,500 for medical, and $1,500 for pharmacy. My out-of-pocket maximum will jump up to $7,150.
To do the same math as I did last year: in 2017, I’ll pay $3,516.96 for the privilege of only having to pay $7,150 towards any medical costs.
Let’s hope I have a very healthy year.
Have any of you gotten similar health insurance letters? How much are your costs going to increase in 2017?

The Cost of Getting My Eyes Checked Without Insurance
Even though I’m sure my prescription hasn’t changed.
Photo: elston
As of late, I have been consumed with the idea of new glasses. I’ve been wearing glasses since I was a kid and it is only recently that I discovered that buying glasses is a really fun way to spend money — buying clothes, but for my face! No one really needs new glasses unless the glasses they currently own are broken. My glasses are just fine. They spend a lot of time being slowly crushed to death under my slumbering form, as I apparently remove them in the middle of the night when I fall asleep reading and place them directly under my body for safekeeping.
This habit means that they’re a little worse for wear and so I would like new ones. Also, the idea of having glasses that actually stay on my face is appealing to me. Recently glasses manufacturers have started making glasses for people with a “low nose bridge.” Perhaps the bridge of my nose is low, or maybe my cheeks are very big or I honestly couldn’t tell you what the deal is, but glasses refuse to stay on my face and slide down my nose and it drives me bonkers. I was convinced it was a hoax, some sort of marketing trick that I was eager to fall for, but I tried on a pair of glasses with a low nose bridge, they cost $95 (thanks for looking out for us, Warby Parker), and when I marched up to the counter to buy them, I was informed that my prescription was expired.
I don’t have vision insurance, which is fine for the most part. My semi-annual eye exam is nothing more than a confirmation that yes, I still need glasses. With insurance, the process is seamless, easy and nearly free. Without insurance, it’s a little bit different.
$132 for an eye exam that also includes a contact lens exam, scheduled on ZocDoc and confirmed by an employee. “It says here your insurance ran out on June 30, 2016,” she said gently on the phone. “Did you…know that?”
Yes, I knew that. Yes, I should’ve scheduled an eye appointment immediately after I lost my job, as well as a doctor’s appointment, a visit to the gynecologist, the dentist and maybe a chiropractor. Yes, I understand that this was not the smartest decision I could’ve made, but here we are.
My eye doctor is astonishingly efficient, a fact that I always forget and feel slightly concerned about after an eye exam (without dilation) lasts for about 10 minutes, max.
A possible $200 for contact lenses: There is a contact lens startup called Hubble that purports to disrupt contacts, offering daily contacts for $30 a month. $200 buys me a year’s supply of monthly contacts, which I remember to change monthly most of the time. Hubble costs more money, so we’ll see. Also, it feels weird to get my contacts from a place that doesn’t seem to be vetted by an eye doctor. (Correction: I have just learned that Hubble does indeed check with your eye doctor about your prescription, so joke’s on me.)
$95 for those glasses: I promise that I will take them off before I go to bed.
Total: $227, with a possible $200 extra if I decide to live my life unencumbered by spectacles.

Insurance on the Blockchain
In which I coin the term insure-bits and disrupt the entire insurance industry.
[NOTE: This is my own version of the same piece you can find on ConsenSys’ web site.]
For months, I’ve been conjuring up radical visions of a brave new decentralized world with use cases from robotic ants that explore the walls of buildings to what I call “programmable land,” to hospitals that run themselves without administrators and people voting on their cell phones. I’ve tried to think of a way to radically reshape insurance. Aside from the standard disintermediation story, I’ve been drawing a blank for months.
Until last week, when I hit upon an idea that may well change the nature of insurance within a decade. I explained it to some people in the insurance industry yesterday, and they took three pages of hand-written notes. I want to document it here so everyone can get the idea.
Tokens, Tokens Everywhere
I’m working on a project I call the Token Factory, which, although I’m considered a “friend of ConsenSys,” is not the same as ConsenSys’ version of the same name. ConsenSys’ project, which recently soft-launched along with MetaMask, the Ethereum browser add-on, is now available to help people make simple tokens. Mine is not yet online.
The goal is to build a web site anyone can come to, specify a new token, and have a bunch of them in his/her wallet fairly quickly. A token is a transferable unit of value within a system. It is governed by a single person, organization, or consortium. A rail is a token that crosses system boundaries easily. A currency is a token that is accepted by a large number of systems.
Today, we are building fairly simple tokens that represent things like tickets, local currencies, cars, baseball cards, cows, trees, the hours of a consultant’s time, etc. When you trade the token, the ownership (or use of) that thing transfers.
Tomorrow, using Ethereum, we’ll build smart tokens that have all their business logic and regulation compliance built in. And that’s what gets me thinking about insurance.
Insurance Balls
Think of the market for insurance. At the 30,000-foot level, it’s millions and millions of contracts that specify how much a buyer pays in premiums and how much an insurance company pays under what circumstances. These contracts are often complex and sticky — they are custom-made for each customer and each situation. Try making a change to one of your insurance contracts! It can take about as much effort as getting a new one altogether.
Now think of it differently. Think of the market for insurance products as broken into small modules, each of which fundamentally represents an investment. There’s an investor on one side; on the other side is a customer paying a premium, providing an income stream. And in the middle, there’s a specification of risk and payment under various circumstances. Think of these as balls of different colors, sizes, and types. In reality, there aren’t that many different kinds — a few dozen basic types should describe most situations. A policy, then, could be a particular combination of these balls to suit the requirements of a given customer at a given time — sort of like a customer putting the balls into a sack. We could replace our collections of contracts with virtual sacks of these balls.
So here’s the idea: Create tokens that represent small units of insurance, and then let customers come along and put all the units they want into their “insurance wallet.” A smallest unit, for example, could have a $10 monthly premium and pay out as much as, say, $10,000 if conditions are met. Now put these tokens into a marketplace where all investors and consumers can see them. This creates a liquid market with low spreads and no middlemen.
Of course, people wouldn’t choose these small units by hand — they would specify what coverage they want, and software can buy the tokens they need. The tokens trade at market price at all times, depending on various risk factors that can move prices up or down.
Insure-Bits
As a token gesture, I’m going to coin a new term: insure-bits. An insure-bit is a cryptographic token that represents an indivisible unit of insurance of some kind. Presumably, a consortium would taxonomize and standardize the formats for these tokens, so they can unambiguously represent legal contractual agreements. Taking a decentralizing step further, they would actually be legal contractual agreements. Customers and investors would aggregate insure-bits on a common exchange to build portfolios that suit them.
Once we have an insure-bit infrastructure and ecosystem, we get real-time dynamic allocation. That’s right — you could automatically have the exact combination of insurance you need at each moment, and that mix of insure-bits can vary according to circumstances. Your insurance bot could increase your homeowner’s insurance as it learns about potential storms, or it could add to your travel insurance if it knows you’ve just rented a motorcycle. If the value of one of your assets goes up (as determined by an oracle — see below), that could trigger the purchase of some more insure-bits. Keep in mind that dynamic allocation also involves dynamic pricing — you’ll find that the insurance you want to buy in a hurry may be significantly more expensive than before, when you didn’t need it.
The Google-ization of Insurance
In essence, this is what Google did to advertising. While advertisers were buying big media campaigns that included banner ads as part of the mix, Google broke every single search word down into its own little market and sold the words at market price. This is the atomization of advertising — by breaking everything down into the smallest possible unit, it’s easy for buyers to purchase what they want when they want it, and they can specify in fairly sophisticated ways how much they are willing to pay for various words under various conditions. Whatever insure-bits you have in your portfolio at the exact time of the fire, or the car accident, or the cancellation of your flight determines your payoff.
Similarly, the obligations these tiny tokens represent can be traded on the back end as well. They can be assembled, modeled, tested, collateralized, and securitized in real time to meet the needs of various investors. The fact that both investors and customers are constantly trading these things has no impact on the market, since a double-spend is impossible and we can determine exactly the conditions that trigger the payouts. Investors may have to put up large deposits to ensure payouts, or they can securitize their holdings with tokens that represent real assets. None of this is particularly different from the way things are done today, but insure-bits moves everything to a real-time basis, which will automate and improve the industry significantly.
This could happen in many other industries. Stop making custom products. Just make a number of identical products, turn them into smart tokens with all their rules attached, add the regulatory code, and let the market buy and trade them at will (think: mortgages, tax liens, bonds, etc.). Anything that is currently traded in large lumps could be traded as groups of tokens that represent the smallest unit of value in the lump. This increase in granularity requires less custom work, making markets more efficient.
I haven’t spent much time on it, but I think this general concept eliminates the need for most reinsurance as well. There will always be one-off cases for special insurance, but in general most of the basic insurance and re-insurance use cases can be met with combinations of standard insure-bits.
We’re Going to Need a Better Oracle
Which brings me to the oracle problem. People in the insurance business know that there is still no clean, decisive definition of a car accident. If smart contracts are going to pay off when triggered by various events and conditions in the real world, we’ll need oracle services to put that information onto the blockchain.
I won’t go into the details on oracles, because my friend Matt Liston has written a short piece on oracles that will get you started. Oracles will be hard to design, execute, and integrate with smart contracts, but they’ll be important. We’ll start with simple things and working toward more complex solutions. Insurance companies should be putting a lot of effort into oracle services — we’re going to need a lot of them, as each little atom of insurance will have its corresponding oracle to trigger payment unambiguously.
We’ll probably also need a better definition of time. If my car is in an accident, my personal data locker could immediately try to buy more insurance before the market is aware of the event. Cases like this will bring in a new, connected infrastructure that ties oracles, sensors, cameras, published information, witnesses, and the Internet of Things all together using a common timeline that helps determine what happens when. This is another set of challenges we’ll need to solve before the insure-bit ecosystem is fully functional. But it sure beats the ecosystem we have today.
Who wins and who loses in this scenario? Both people buying insurance and those providing risk capital gain. The losers are the large, branded insurance companies that like to keep the print very small and the contracts very long. Yet, if you think about it, there are opportunities. We’ll use software to do our dynamic allocation, and that software will be tied into our personal data lockers. Do you see any business opportunities there? Could this be a chance for insurance companies to re-invent themselves on the side of the customer, rather than extracting rents as intermediaries?
Summary
Yes, there are a lot of moving parts to this approach, but it’s very doable. It’s probably 95 percent more efficient than today’s insurance market, and possibly several times better for everyone except the intermediaries. It applies to plenty of other industries as well. The concept of tiny insurance tokens explodes the industry, from monolithic paper contracts to agile smart contracts that are infinitely adjustable both to buyers and sellers. A crazy idea like this could upend the insurance sector sooner than the CEOs of many large insurance companies may think.
David Siegel is a blockchain consultant, entrepreneur, lecturer, proprietor of DecentralStation.com, and runs a blockchain bootcamp for organizations. You can learn more at www.kryptodesign.com and connect with him on LinkedIn.

The new age of insurance marketing
Sharing a presentation I put together for a talk at Lloyd’s last week. For avid followers of the sector you are unlikely to find anything new, but hopefully a useful overview. Plus a few personal views on which distribution models might or might not work out.


Trump Meets With Health-Insurance Executives About Repealing Obamacare
On Monday, President Donald Trump met with health-insurance heads to discuss transitioning the nation away from the Affordable Care Act, Reuters reports.
Health-insurance companies are a major contributor to how well Obamacare functions. When major companies such as UnitedHealth and Aetna began pulling out of states’ individual marketplaces last year, it left some states with just one marketplace insurer. Experts worried that, as those companies faced no competition, they would raise their premiums and make insurance unaffordable. “We must work together to save Americans from Obamacare — you people know that and everyone knows that, at this point — to create more competition and to bring down the prices substantially,” Trump said during the meeting.
Although it remains unclear what exactly might replace the Affordable Care Act if it is repealed, Trump mentioned he wants to expand health-care savings accounts, offer “state flexibility,” and allow Americans to buy insurance across state lines.

Data Analytics in Insurance
I attended the IBM World of Watson event last October. It was a great occasion to learn about the latest developments in data analytics and cognitive computing, to discover the IBM solutions for Financial Services and to meet with representatives from the Banking & Insurance industries.
Before highlighting how data analytics can be leveraged in Insurance, I would like to share 3 general observations:
[1] There is no single definition of Cognitive Computing. People agree broadly on the concept, but have different perspectives depending on their background. My definition:
cognitive computing is about leveraging the power of data analytics to create natural human-machine interactions, to extract knowledge from data, and ultimately to improve business decisions.
I divide Cognitive Computing into 3 categories:
Information capture (vision recognition, speech to text, …)
Information processing (NLP, clustering)
Machine learning (deep learning, predictive analytics)
[2] “Algorithms” cover a wide range of techniques from simple statistical reasoning, to machine learning and artificial intelligence. So when people try to sell you their “big data”, “data analytics” or “artificial intelligence” solution, it is worth digging to understand what is behind the words.

[3] Augmentation was a key theme: “intelligent” robots won’t replace humans completely, they will AUGMENT humans. It is not just a buzz word but something real. For instance in 2016 the songwriter-producer Alex Da Kid composed his song “Easy” with the help of IBM Watson. Watson analyzed both the sounds and lyrics of all the billboard hits for the last decades and was able to identify patterns. Alex used this output to refine the analysis and select some of the song’s themes. The song was the result of interactions between the human and the machine.
Now back to Insurance. Data analytics can be leveraged at different steps of the Insurance value chain:
Marketing
The analysis of customer segmentation and behaviors (predicting the churn to increase retention, anticipation of life events, etc.)
Sales & Services
Personalized advice to customers (product recommendation, cross-selling)
Support of contact center agents
Risk scoring & underwriting
Dynamic modeling of risks (combination of connected sensors with advanced analytics)
Fraud pattern detection
Operations & Claim management
Cognitive Automation: cognitive computing coupled with robotics process automation
— —— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — -
For more details on IBM products and some of the use-cases, please check the IBM Solutions for Insurance.
I learned a lot during a short period of time. It was a great experience. Thank you Susan for the opportunity and for the perfect organization!
— — — — — — — — — — — —— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — -

Insights on Insurance and AI
This is a short piece summarizing applications of AI in the insurance industry
Image Credit: Telnov Oleksii/Shutterstock
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is revolutionizing every industry, and insurance will be affected as well. As already stated in previous posts, AI today is perceived in three different ways: it is something that might answer all your questions, with an increasing degree of accuracy (“the Oracle”); it could do anything it is commanded to do (“the Genie”), or it might act autonomously to pursue a certain long-term goal (“the Sovereign”). My personal definition is the following one:
An artificial intelligence is a system that can learn how to learn, or in other words a series of instructions (an algorithm) that allows computers to write their own algorithms without being explicitly programmed for.
An artificial engine can also be classified in three ways: a narrow AI, which is nothing more than a specific domain application or task that gets better by ingesting further data and “learns” how to reduce the output error. An example here is DeepBlue for the chess game, but more generally this group includes all the functional technologies that serve a specific purpose. These systems are usually quite controllable because limited to specific tasks.
When a program is instead not programmed for completing a specific task, but it could eventually learn from an application and apply the same bucket of knowledge to different environments, we face an Artificial General Intelligence (AGI). This is not technology-as-a-service as in the narrow case, but rather technology-as-a-product. The best example for this subgroup is Google DeepMind, although it is not a real AGI in all respects.
The final stage is instead called Superintelligent AI (ASI): this intelligence exceeds largely the human one, and it is able of scientific and creative thinking; it is characterized by general common wisdom; it has social skills and maybe an emotional intelligence.
Regardless of the current stage of AI development, the insurance industry will be disrupted from several perspectives: first of all, every process that is done manually today will be automatized in a smart way (e.g., claims processing and management) to reduce costs and improve the UX. This would turn into a better fraud detection as well as more efficient loss prevention. The second block is obviously telematics and Internet of Things applications because innovative devices collect new data that can widen the horizon of insurable risks as well as refine the customized pricing. More generally, underwritings and more granular pricing will be better defined using machine learning techniques that spot out unknown meaningful correlations. Finally, customer acquisition and experience in a sector which is historically reserved for human agents will become completely digital: chatbots, more effective customer classification and targeting, and personalized contents and policies are the main immediate benefits from investments in AI technologies.
Historically, insurance is sold, not bought. But AI is coming, and it will undermine this principle. Is the insurance industry ready for such a change?
— —
Follow me on Medium
Look at my other articles on AI and Machine Learning:
Artificial Intelligence Verticals (I): Insurance
How to look at the insurance industry through the AI lensmedium.com
AI and Speech Recognition: A Primer for Chatbots
An analysis of conversational interfaces and startups working on speech recognition and chatbots.medium.com
13 Forecasts on Artificial Intelligence
Where AI is headedmedium.com

What Cyber Security taught me about Life Insurance

I have been enamored with both insurance and cyber security startups as an investor over the past 2 years but have always assumed that these were two separate interests of mine that managed to find a random meeting point in my life. I have been extremely fortunate to be an investor in Cirrosecure (acquired by Palo Alto Networks), Prevoty and InAuth, three thriving startups which I believe will form the pillars of cyber security in the future. In late 2014, I went on a hunt to find a startup that was keen on disrupting the online insurance market and thanks to my good friend Roseanne Wincek, I came to know two eager and highly talented founders, Jennifer Fitzgerald and Francois de Lame who were trying to disrupt the online insurance distribution model through their platform called PolicyGenius (you should Google the original name they came up with). After a year together, 4 board meetings and an additional $20M in the bank, I am blessed to have the both of them as friends and chalked it up to another fortunate chapter in my book of life.
So it was with interest that I read the TechCrunch article on Cockroaches vs Unicorns: The Golden Age of Cybersecurity startup as part of our daily reading as a team. Interesting data — expected that. But insightful? Didn’t see that one coming. Yes, the article was supposed to discuss the future of the cybersecurity ecosystem, but what stood out were the parallels they drew between cyber security and life insurance. The two disparate interests I had were not so anymore. While insurance and cyber security are two very different industries, the purpose they serve, value to the customer, the way they should be sold and what makes them so compelling as investments are strikingly similar. That “Aha” moment made me realize how I should be helping my other portfolio companies and improve my judgment as an investor
1. Consumer education needs to be data-driven but stay away from threats
I find it hard to do business with people who sell based on fear, “What will happen to your kids when you pass away?” or “Think of how much money you could lose if your servers went down for a day”. I am not asking you to downplay the risk factors but make your argument using actual data, probabilities and honest counsel. 83% of Americans don’t buy life insurance as they believe it is too expensive. $400 is what most Americans believe a 20-year, $250,000 level term life policy for a healthy 30-year-old costs annually. It actually costs $150 and more than half of that 83% would consider it to be affordable. Would that change your opinion on getting a life policy?
2. Choices are a good thing, but today’s consumer is overwhelmed with choices and desperately needs guidance
There are 18 million ‘stuck shoppers’ in the US who want life insurance but have been derailed in the shopping process largely due to the overwhelming number of options. The most common words you would hear if you attend a meeting with Chief Security Officers (CSO) is cyber threats and they want to know how to deal with it. Like life insurance shoppers, they are being approached by different software vendors who all sell the promise of helping them cast away all their worries. The 3 cyber security startups I invested in are all building a product in response to a specific, yet sizeable threat and have made that crystal clear in their messaging. Take Prevoty for example, organizations these days run multiple applications and the number will continue to grow. Instead of having a one size fits all security solution, organizations now need tailored security platform for each of their applications. Guiding the CSO to understand the problem, its magnitude and how your platform will fix that is what Prevoty does well.
3. “You can check-out any time you like, but you can never leave! “
Hotel California is one of my favorite songs of all time. I remember trying to learn the riff on the guitar back in high school, but could never quite master it. Perhaps not being able to leave might be too harsh a way to describe insurance and cyber security startups, but in a way it is true. Technological changes notwithstanding, insurance and cyber security is something that individuals and businesses will always need and will always pay for. The lifetime value of a customer is incredibly long and it makes no sense for customer who has been diligently paying their monthly payments to give up their insurance policy or security platform as if something goes wrong thereafter, then all the previous payments would have gone to waste. I challenge myself and entrepreneurs out there to create business models where the consumer is incented to continue with their monthly payments.
Ok, I shall end my post with a honest confession. I still have not bought a life insurance policy. I know, i know… and that is one of the first things on my ‘to-do’ list for 2016.
Sources: TechCrunch, LIMRA

Insurance Technology Q2 Update in 15 Visuals
We at Venture Scanner are tracking 876 Insurance Technology companies across 14 categories, with a combined funding amount of $10.32 Billion. The 15 visuals below summarize the current state of Insurance Technology.
1. Insurance Technology Market Overview

We organize Insurance Technology into the 14 categories listed below:
Auto Insurance: Companies that offer insurance for automobiles and motorcycles, as well as those that facilitate the process of auto insurance. Examples include car telematics products which detect your mileage and driving behavior to customize your insurance plan.
Consumer Insurance Management Platforms: Companies that enable consumers to manage their insurance and claims, usually through a mobile application. Examples include mobile apps that allow consumers to file claims right at the spot of the car accident, and to buy travel insurance on the go.
Employee Benefits Platforms: Companies that help enterprises build or utilize platforms that deliver healthcare and other insurance products to their employees. Examples include web portals through which enterprises can sign in and give their employees the option of buying several healthcare packages.
Enterprise/Commercial Insurance: Companies that offer insurance plans for large/medium/small-sized businesses and enterprises. Examples include insurance plans for startup founders and freelancers, insurance for large enterprises such as liability insurance, and workers compensation insurance.
Health/Travel Insurance: Companies that offer health and/or travel insurance, either for individuals or for businesses. Examples include health insurance plans that are customizable to your exact needs, and travel insurance that can be adjusted based on where you are.
Insurance Comparison/Marketplace: Companies that serve as a marketplace for consumers to buy insurance of any kind (car to home to health), or compare different insurance quotes. Examples include 3rd party companies that don’t offer insurance plans themselves, but act as a brokerage agent between insurance providers and consumers.
Insurance Data/Intelligence: Companies that collect, process, and analyze data analytics and business intelligence for the insurance industry. Examples include background checks on an individual’s history to determine insurance eligibility, or inspections on a real estate property for potential risks.
Insurance Education/Resources: Companies that offer educational material and resources that give information about how insurance works. Examples include news outlets focused on the insurance industry, and community forums that exchange knowledge of insurance between individuals.
Insurance Infrastructure/Backend: Companies that either underwrite insurance policies or help insurance companies with their day-to-day operations. Examples include insurance underwriters, CRM for agents and lawyers, communication tools, and claim filing tools.
Insurance User Acquisition: Companies that help insurance companies acquire and manage new leads and clients. Examples include platforms that are specifically designed for marketing insurance policies to potential customers, and those that record and manage insurance companies’ customers.
Life, Home, Property & Casualty Insurance: Companies that offer life, home, and property & casualty insurance, as well as other kinds of insurance such as renters, disability, and marriage insurance. Examples include websites that offer life, home, and P&C insurance in packages.
P2P Insurance: Companies that offer peer-to-peer insurance, in which a group of policyholders jointly pay for the insurance of an item that they mutually own, share, or rent (such as a car, house, or media equipment). Examples include P2P insurance platforms in which a group of bicyclists jointly buy insurance for all of their bikes.
Product Insurance: Companies that offer insurance and warranties for products that consumers purchase, from tech gadgets to diamonds. Examples include insurance plans for your smartphone in case it is stolen or is broken.
Reinsurance: Companies that provide insurance for other insurance companies. Examples include companies that offer insurers coverage to mitigate and manage their risks.
2. Company Count by Insurance Technology Category

The above graph summarizes the number of companies in each InsurTech category to show which categories are dominating the current market. The Comparison/Marketplace category is leading the way with 233 companies, followed by the Infrastructure/Backend category with 168 companies.
3. Funding by Insurance Technology Category

The above graph summarizes the total amount of funding in each InsurTech category. The Health/Travel Insurance category is leading the market with over $3.3B in total funding, followed by the Insurance Data category with $2.6B in total funding.
4. Venture Investing In Insurance Technology

The above graph compares the total venture funding in each InsurTech category to the number of companies in the category. The Health/Travel Insurance category is leading in the Total Funding stat with over $3.3B, whereas the Comparison/Marketplace category is leading in the Company Count stat with 233 companies.
5. Insurance Technology Total Funding by Year

The above graph summarizes the total funding raised by InsurTech companies each year. 2015 was the best year in InsurTech funding thus far with over $2.5B raised, which is almost 2X the amount of funding raised in 2013 ($1.4B). In 2015 a few key InsurTech players such as ZhongAn, Zenefits, Oscar, SIGFOX, and Clover Health all received major rounds of funding upwards of $100M.
6. Average Funding by Insurance Technology Category

The above graph summarizes the average company funding in each InsurTech category. The Reinsurance category leads the market with over $264M in funding per company, followed by the Life, Home, P&C category with about $212M in funding per company.
7. Average Age by Insurance Technology Category

The above graph summarizes the average age of companies in each InsurTech category. Reinsurance ranks as the most mature InsurTech category with an average age of 39.5 years per company, followed by the Life, Home, P&C category at a close second with an average age of 39 years per company. We included a few more established companies that are innovating in these categories, which explains the relative maturity of the average ages.
8. Median Age by Insurance Technology Category

The above graph summarizes the median age of companies in each InsurTech category. Life, Home, P&C ranks as the most mature InsurTech category with a median age of 19 years per company, followed by the Reinsurance category with a median age of 17 years per company. We included a few more established companies that are innovating in these categories, which explains the relative maturity of the median ages.
9. Insurance Technology Company Count by Country

The above map shows the number of InsurTech companies located in different countries. The United States ranks as the top country with 504 InsurTech companies, with the United Kingdom at a distant second with 64 companies.
10. Insurance Technology VC Funding by Country

The above map shows the amount of InsurTech venture capital funding in different countries. The United States has the most InsurTech VC funding at $10B, with Bermuda coming in at a distant second with $527M.
11. Insurance Technology Companies Founded by Year

The above graph summarizes the number of InsurTech companies founded in a certain year. 2013 ranks as the top year with 70 InsurTech companies founded, with 2014 at a close second with 67 InsurTech companies founded.
12. Insurance Technology Funding by Vintage Year

The above graph summarizes the total amount of funding raised by the InsurTech companies founded in a certain year. InsurTech companies founded in 2013 have raised the most funding at $2.5B. A few key InsurTech players founded in 2013 such as ZhongAn, Oscar, Zenefits, and Collective Health have raised major amounts of funding upwards of $100M up to date.
13. Insurance Technology Headcount Distribution

The above graph summarizes the percentage of InsurTech companies with a certain employee headcount range. Companies with 1–50 employees make up over 73% of the market.
14. Number of Insurance Technology Investments by Selected Investors

The above graph summarizes the total number of investment rounds InsurTech investors participated in. Founders Fund, Index Ventures, and Accel outperformed all of their peers, each having made 10 investments into InsurTech companies. First Round and New Enterprise Associates were the runners-up with 9 investments.
15. Number of Insurance Technology Companies Backed by Selected Investors

The above graph summarizes the number of unique InsurTech companies funded by selected investors. Accel takes the top spot by having invested in a total of 10 unique InsurTech companies, followed by Startupbootcamp which has invested in 8 unique InsurTech companies.
Note: If you missed it, you can also read our FinTech Q1 Update in 15 Visuals, Artificial Intelligence Q1 Update in 15 Visuals, Health Technology Q1 Update in 15 Visuals, and Bitcoin Q2 Update in 15 Visuals.
Venture Scanner is your platform for startup landscapes, data, and research. If you would like access to the full Insurance Technology landscape and dataset, visit https://www.venturescanner.com/insurance-technology or reach out to info@venturescanner.com.

Should I Get Dental Insurance?
I probably should. But… ugh.
“Dental plan!” “Lisa needs braces!”
So the one thing holding me back for signing up for my new Bronze health plan is that the state of Washington is also now offering me the opportunity to sign up for a Bronze, Silver, or Gold dental plan.
This is new, or at least it’s new to me; previously I had been insured through Premera, but this year Premera told me that to get new Premera insurance I’d have to apply through Washington Health Plan Finder. I’ll tell you the story of that whole business later; it involved a lot of phone calls and glitchy websites, but I finally got my login set up, selected my Premera Bronze plan (with premiums that cost 19 percent more this year), and was given the option to add dental through SmartSmile.
The Bronze dental plan has a premium of $18.75 per month. There is no deductible, but there are no out-of-pocket maximums, either; it essentially gets you discounts on common dental procedures like cleanings and crowns, and anything not covered by the plan is my responsibility to pay in full.
Which, sure, I should get my teeth cleaned. It’s been a while. So I did the math: this dental plan will cost me $225 in premiums over the course of a year, plus another $71 for the checkup (including teeth cleaning, which comes with a separate subcharge, and X-rays).
I might be able to get a teeth cleaning for less than $296 without insurance. But I know that what I’m really paying for is the day when I break a tooth, or maybe have the first cavity I’ve ever had in my life, or something. None of that stuff has ever happened to me before—I did chip a tooth when I was a kid, but that’s it—but it could.
So. Should I get this dental insurance? Or should I continue not having dental insurance, just like I haven’t had dental insurance for the past four years?


Doh!
Why Health Insurance Companies Owe us Money
One of today’s headlines reads Blue Shield of California owes $83 million to Obamacare enrollees, small businesses. It’s easy to feel reactionary or angry upon learning this, of course. However, to understand how the money flows, let’s glance at a chronology of health insurance industry money.
Pricing. There are two basic types of health insurance pricing:
Community pricing & Actuarial pricing
Community pricing: economists look at a whole community to figure out what it costs to take care of that community. They then divide that total dollar amount by the number of people in the community. The resulting figure becomes the price per person for health insurance premiums.
Community pricing was the standard practice after World War II in the U.S. Back then the government left health insurance companies to run tax free; and it was a time when the average cost of insurance company administration was 5% leaving 95% of insurance premium dollars to be dispensed on health care. Back then premium prices were low — the sick and the healthy paid the same amount, but that didn’t bother anyone. Then, in the 1970s we saw an explosion of a) demographics and b) medical technology. People started living longer. Specifically, in the year 2000 as many people over the age of 100 were alive as were people over the age of 65 in 1965. The longer people live, the more likely they will need health care. But back in 1965, there were no CT scans or super expensive medications. So booming demographics and expensive technology, along with c) laws that demand that more and more health conditions must be covered by insurance, drove health insurance premium prices sky high.
Actuarial pricing: economists look at an individual person to determine the risk of getting sick to price insurance premiums. In this case, healthy people have low premiums and sick people have higher premiums.
Obamacare is a hybrid of community and actuarial pricing. The theory is that if enough young, healthy people buy health insurance they do not use, it will offset the costs of paying for chronically sick people. We don’t know yet if this “economics of balance” will work ……
But back to actuarial pricing -> insurance companies figured out how to weed out the sick people by denying care according to pre-existing conditions. Denial of care practices evolved 1975–1992 as health care costs began to explode. Large scale HMOs became the popular practice by the early 1990s when Wall Street entered health care to financialize it as they did so by focusing on management practices. During this evolution, management/administrative expenses crept up from 5% to 35% of health care operating budgets. One year the head of United Healthcare was paid a salary of $1.2 billion dollars! Finally, the government intervened by passing a law that the maximum amount of health care premium dollars allowed to be spent on administration was 20%. Since then, regardless of how health care is priced, we have the 80/20 rule mandating that 80% (and in some cases 85%) of premium dollars must be spent on providing care.
Gaming the System. It was not just health insurance exectives that practiced greed & cheat during this time. Providers (hopsitals, doctors) responded to the management of health care by gaming the system: for instance, hospital administrators would tell doctors to discharge patients as soon as possible, and often before they were ready. Because the less time a patient spent in the hospital, the more profit for that hospital. And if a patient needed a CT scan during their stay, for instance, doctors were ordered to discharge the patient and re-order the test as an outpatient procedure. While doctors may have felt uncomfortable, they did what they were told because 1) they were rated by hospital administrators and 2) they figured the patient who left too early would come back, allowing the hospital to collect money for two admissions instead of one. Another popular trick for gaming the system was via hospital codes and prices: wildly inflated hospital prices, that in many places are still prevalent today.
Government regulators have been working to stop the greed, for instance via Medicare and Medicaid audits like the RAC audit and ZPIC audit.
How Insurance Companies Make Money. There are two basic ways health insurance companies make money:
Premiums & Investments
When premium money comes into a health insurance company, it is referred to as a “loss” to set a mindset to avoid dispensing care. Health insurance companies try to minimize losses by setting up doctor panels and negotiating in-network contracts, for instance….practices that determine how much money a health insurance company pays providers for care (reimbursement). One such practice to determine health care reimbursement is called a Diagnosis Related Group (DRG). So let’s say it is determined that the cost of someone having a heart attack is $X. The health insurance company says to the hospital “We are going to pay you $X for a heart attack. Many heart attack patients who come in will experience complications that cost you more, and many other patients will experience easy recoveries that will cost you less, so it’s your job to decide how to manage the patients and practice medicine so you don’t go broke.” For this reason, doctors have been pressured to practice the cheapest medicine possible to maximize hospital profits by seeing as many patients per day as possible — a practice called fee-for-service. But Obamacare is forcing providers and insurance companies like Blue Cross away from fee-for-service health care. And Aetna published information on health insurance premium rates to inform customers how they are using their money.
Again, 80% of the money within a health insurance company must be spent on care. If there is ever any money left over from that 80%, health insurance companies must give back to customers via premium rebate checks.
In terms of investments, many health insurance companies are putting their money into digital health. Whether or not these investments will be profitable is yet to be determined.
Moving Forward with Obamacare.
Until Obamacare, individuals could only qualify for health insurance through employer work benefits, Medicaid (if financially qualified), or Medicare (if over the age of 65). This left millions of Americans without health insurance, creating a chaotic and uncontrollable economic landscape. Obamacare is rapidly spiking the number of people with health insurance, hypothetically balancing the economics. We don’t know yet. Like one insurance adjuster said to me “Pricing Obamacare health care plans is a bit like throwing darts: we don’t know yet how to make a profit until the many unknown accounting variables (are the newly insured paying their monthly premiums, how many are using state exchange plans vs. Medicaid, how many providers are accepting Obamacare contracts, etc.) settle in.” My guess for the end of year 1 was that insurance companies will come out to say they need to elevate premiums, while consumers and larger companies will demand more affordable health care.
Let’s see…….

Some GOP lawmakers back away from Trumpcare after learning millions will lose insurance
Not all Republicans are eager to back a plan that could cost 24 million people their health insurance.
Keith Hall is the GOP’s handpicked Congressional Budget Office director. CREDIT: AP Photo/J. Scott Applewhite
On Monday, the Congressional Budget Office released its analysis of House Republicans’ plan to replace the Affordable Care Act with a series of smaller tax incentives for consumers and a massive tax cut for health insurance companies with overpaid CEOs. And its assessment that the legislation would result in 24 million more uninsured Americans over ten years has some congressional Republicans worried.
Trumpcare could cost 24 million people their insurance, government analysis finds
The Congressional Budget Office just released its much anticipated report. Republicans were right to be scared.thinkprogress.org
To push back on the CBO’s findings, Trump administration and Republican leaders have alternately attempted to cherry-pick favorable pieces of the scoring and to undermine the credibility of the non-partisan budget office (which is run by an economist who was handpicked by the congressional GOP leadership in 2015).
But a growing number of Republican legislators are indicating that the CBO scoring has given them pause or led them to oppose Trumpcare outright.
Sen. Roy Blunt (R-MO): Blunt cheered the money-saving numbers in the CBO score, but conceded reservations about the report as a whole. “In terms of coverage, we need to get a better sense of what Health and Human Services can do,” he observed, adding that the 24 million number was “troublesome” to efforts to pass the bill.
Sen. Bill Cassidy (R-LA): A physician himself, Cassidy told Politico, “Can’t sugarcoat it. Doesn’t look good,” adding, “The CBO score was, shall we say, an eye-popper.” He told TPM the score was “awful.” “President Trump says he wants as many people covered as under Obamacare, and in that Washington Post article he said health care should be affordable. So if there’s truly 24 million people [losing coverage], of course it’s a concern.”
Sen. Susan Collins (R-ME): Collins said on Monday: “The CBO estimate that millions of Americans could lose their health insurance coverage if the House bill were to become law is cause for alarm. It should prompt the House to slow down and reconsider certain provisions of the bill.”
Sen. Tom Cotton (R-AR): In a radio interview on Tuesday, Cotton opined that while the CBO “is not Moses,” he believes the House should have waited for the scoring before taking up the Trumpcare legislation. “It has a lot of useful information for us to digest,” he said. “I think it’s incumbent upon us to evaluate their evidence and facts [to] help improve the bill.”
Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX):According to an ABC News reporter, Cruz said Tuesday that the scoring showed that “under the House bill, premiums would continue to rise next year and the year thereafter. That is unacceptable.”
Sen. Steve Daines (R-MT): In a statement in response to the CBO report, Daines said, “We need to do better… I want to see costs and premiums go down to make health care more affordable for Montana families.”
Sen. Cory Gardner (R-CO): According to Politico, Gardner — who has expressed concerns about the Medicaid rollback provisions in Trumpcare — said, “We’ve got work to do here” in response to the CBO score.
Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-SC): Graham told reporters on Monday, “At the end of the day we should pause and try to improve the product in the light of the CBO analysis rather than just rejecting it.” He defended the nonpartisan effort, observing, “We like the CBO when they agree with us. When they don’t, they’re a bunch of losers… If half of what they’re saying is true, then I think we should slow down and see if we address it.”
Sen. Orrin Hatch (R-UT): In response to questions about the increase in uninsured estimated by the CBO, the Senate Finance Chairman said, “Naturally, I’m concerned.”
Sen. John McCain (R-AZ): TPM reported on Monday that McCain said that while the CBO was “wildly wrong on the initial estimates of Obamacare,” he also conceded, “I’m very worried about what the House bill would do to Arizona.”
Sen. David Perdue (R-GA): According to the Washington Post, after the CBO report, Perdue told reporters, “I’m not going to tell the House what to do, but it’s important that we slow this down and get this right.”
Rep. Mark Amodei (R-NV): In response to the CBO scoring, Amodei told the Associated Press that he was disappointed in the GOP leadership for not getting more testimony before writing the bill and that if he had to vote today, he would likely vote no. He observed, “Quite frankly it looks right now that Nancy Pelosi was much more efficient.”
Rep. Ron DeSantis (R-FL): DeSantis told Fox Business on Tuesday that the “damaging part of that CBO report was they predicted — and I don’t know if this is true but I think there’s an argument that it is — 15 to 20 percent premium increases over the next several years over and above the Obamacare increases. Well, if that happens, then I think it’s gonna be even more difficult for people.”
Rep. Mark Walker (R-NC): The chairman of the 170-plus member Republican Study Committee put out a statement noting that the CBO score “does little to alleviate our conservative concerns for this Obamacare replacement bill.”
Rep. Rob Wittman (R-VA): Wittman announced his opposition to the Trumpcare legislation on Monday. “After reviewing this legislation and receiving the Congressional Budget Office score today, it is clear that this bill is not consistent with the repeal and replace principles for which I stand,” he explained, adding that as he does not think the proposal will do “what is necessary for the short and long-term best interests of Virginians.”
This post will be updated as more members make statements.

What It’s Like To See A Dentist With No Insurance
And, gulp, after 3 years
New Yorker cartoon by Sidney Harris available at All Posters
You all were very encouraging when I mentioned in a D1T some weeks ago that I had been neglecting my teeth for years since, like millions of Americans, I have no dental insurance. And you had good ideas for how to get a check up and cleaning without breaking the bank.
Time To Do 1 Thing! Like Maybe Call The Dentist
35% of Americans don’t have dental insurance. I’m one of them.medium.com
Local friend and Billfold pal Rachel Sugar got in touch with me to recommend someone in the area who was both affordable and good. I finally made the appointment, and I finally dragged myself to the office yesterday, and guys, I was so scared. Like “what if Trump gets his hands on the launch codes” scared.
Because what if the hygienist peeked in my mouth and then recoiled in horror? What if she dashed to a back room shouting, “Johnson! McNamara! Come quick, you have to see this”? What if she summoned the dentist and told him, “Hey, Dr. Rosencrantz, guess what: you can tell your wife that the two of you can totally afford that Bahamas vacation after all, thanks to this lady here in the chair and all the work she needs done on her teeth”?
Something like that actually happened to me when I saw a dentist for the first time in New York City, once I had finally gotten dental insurance through a job. The dentist told me I had several cavities. SEVERAL. And the hygienist made a face at me and said, “What kind of toothbrush do you use?” I was tempted to drown my embarrassment in the East River.
Luckily, this time, there was no drama. Everyone was super nice. No one shamed me for not having insurance or for avoiding fluoride-scented spaces for so long. No one shamed me at all! In fact, they did exactly what they advertised they would — check up, cleaning—and they treated me like a human being the whole time rather than a frackable plot of land from which they intended to extract all valuable resources before leaving it gaping and ruined.
Best of all, the dentist told me I had no cavities or problems that required follow ups. He gave me a goody bag and smiled me into the lobby, where I paid the lady at the desk and made another appointment for six months from now. Actual cost: $170. Abstract cost of putting the fear behind me and having healthier teeth: priceless.
Of course, in six months, they intimated, they’ll want to take some x-rays. I don’t even want to consider what x-rays would cost sans insurance, but hey, that’s the future! Who has the headspace to worry about that? Maybe by September I’ll have insurance again, or else I’ll have struck it rich by investing in fracking.

Kevin. Chatbot Insurance for the Sharing Economy
Today we are introducing Kevinsured.com. Kevin is a chatbot that provides micro-insurance for your P2P transactions with strangers. From buying football tickets to renting your bicycle, Kevin insures any P2P transactions against theft, fraud, scams, etc. Anything. With Kevin we don't care about the what. We care about the who.
It's really crazy, and that's why it's super exciting. Kevin could change the way we transact with one another.
A light-hearted comedy of a complex P2P transaction
Why we built Kevin:
We first started Traity because we thought that trust online was a problem. In 2011 I bought a second hand laptop on Gumtree. I made a transfer, but never received the laptop. The guy simply disappeared with my money. Maybe I was stupid, or maybe he was just an isolated asshole. Point is, I was scammed. And we didn't want that to happen to other people. Kevin is an iteration on Traity, which includes the real monetary value of insurance beyond our reputation technology.
Millions of transactions happen between strangers every day. Most of them work out really well, but the small percentage of scams make people fear strangers. Kevin will bring confidence to people buying, selling and renting from one another, to "insure the internet".
Kevin is detached from the marketplace. Basically, we don't care where buyers and sellers have met. On a marketplace like AirBnB or Uber, you get both the matching and the insurance in the same pack. But on listings like Craigslist, Gumtree and others, there is no insurance. We thought we could unbundle them, and just focus on the insurance part. So we don't have a search engine for things, we are not a marketplace. You find your buyer or seller somewhere else where there is no insurance, and Kevin insures the transaction.
How it works:
Chat with Kevin on Kevinsured.com and he will ask you what your P2P transaction is about. For example, you are buying train tickets from a stranger you met on Craigslist. Explain the transaction and Kevin will send you a unique link. Send this link to your counterpart, and once that person gets approved, your P2P transaction is insured, for up to $100 against fraud, theft, scams, etc. absolutely for free.
$100 may not sound like much, but it covers most of the transactions online. Furthermore, we think that this is not just about insurance but about prevention. Users who buy and sell through Kevin will be subject to reputation, and scammers will simply try to avoid it, so we are likely to see a low level of scams, just because scammers tend to prefer to be anonymous.
Insured over Blockchain :
Techies might want to know how it works internally. The Kevin protocol takes the reputation of both users, and if both are good, it creates a transaction on blockchain to timestamp that they have agreed to such transaction. This triggers 3 things:
Timestamps the transaction
Buys bitcoin to cover the liabilities in our Blockchain Balance Sheet (click for longer post)
Timestamps the reputation review
This is how the receipt looks like upon approval of the transaction. Both are covered for up to $100
If things go well, both gain 5 star reputation. If there was some scam, users can make a claim to Kevin. So we create a reputation and insurance system for all those marketplaces without star ratings, like craigslist, gumtree, etc.
The future of Kevin:
In the future Kevin could go freemium. For example, if you want to insure the purchase of a $1300 guitar, maybe we will charge $5 for the insurance.
The KevinAPI will also be made available for P2P marketplaces to get insurance for their products and services. In the end, Kevin is more a Protocol than a Bot. The chatbot (currently FB Messenger) approach is just a very simple way to get there.
The future of Insurance:
Insurance is a business where you only communicate with your provider twice. When you buy, which forces you to pay with no immediate benefit, and the moment you claim, which is an unhappy moment regardless. Kevin is more of a companion. Some people will use it for all their transactions, maybe once a month, or once a week. So it opens a completely different story about how to engage with an "insurance service", a companion who helps you along the way. This is a small concept today, but it can lead to big things in the future.
I very much appreciate any feedback and suggestions to make Kevin better, so please let me (or him) know, and we will listen and improve :)

Creating a Better Experience for Insurance
How insurance companies can create solutions to build engagement and long-term customer loyalty?

Insurance is a strange business. Clients are buying insurance in case of something they wish will never happen. Or as a form of a long term investment. Or because they are obliged by the law to have it. Either way there’s a feeling of paying for something and receiving nothing tangible in return. There are no frequent, positive, enjoyable or meaningful interactions between insurance companies and their clients. And when there is an interaction it is often in a sad circumstances of an accident or illness.
Digital initiatives by insurance companies are mostly concerned with selling and claims, and not much in between. But we think there are many possibilities for Value Added Services in insurance to make insurance companies a more helpful presence in their clients’ everyday lives. It’s a way to build a deeper connection with a brand. Otherwise insurers are in a trap of competing on price only, and maybe on quality of their services — but most opinions found online will be bad, because unhappy customers are the most likely to share their views.
Here’s a few ideas.
Connected Car and Helping Drivers
In 2013 we came up with an idea for a device that can connect virtually any car to the Internet. Our earliest concept was that this device, connected to a cloud, could predict a case of a breakdown of a car, then contact the driver and send a repair vehicle perfectly adapted to remove the discovered failure. We presented this concept to a largest insurance company in Poland — PZU, they became interested, and PZU Drive was born.

It was quite an innovative idea back then. In fact, PZU Drive was nominated for Cannes Lions Innovation Awards in 2013.
We have prototyped this device and tested it in the cars of the PZU employees.
Our early prototype of PZU Drive device
Since then we went through many iterations, many different concepts, and researches with customers, and we have learned a lot.
Design of PZU Drive device
Today pay as you drive or usage-based insurance is not uncommon, however services like PZU Drive can also work without being tied to an insurance product (or if it is just an option).
For insurance companies a wireless device plugged into a car can be a source of valuable data, and accompanying mobile app presenting data to the drivers can be a new channel of frequent communication with customers. The device can be offered for free with a car insurance and as a standalone paid product for clients of other insurers.
There is a lot of benefits a service like that can bring to the users:
The app can be a virtual coach teaching users how to drive better, offering feedback about their driving style and presenting helpful tips. There are many possible dimensions to measure, like safety, eco-driving, or taking care of the vehicle.
It can show users how much money they can save by improving their driving style (by using less fuel or less wear-and-tear issues).
It can present interesting statistics about users’ performance and vehicle usage in comparison to other drivers. This experience can be gamified — users can see their improvement in time and compete with their friends. And of course insurers can give rewards to the best drivers, and introduce new competitions and activations from time to time.
The app can present diagnostics information about the car and call assistance in case of a breakdown.
It can help users guard their parked cars. The device can periodically check and share location of the vehicle to the app, so the user can monitor that his vehicle is OK. The app can inform the user that her parked car has been bumped by some other car, or stolen. And it can help to locate the vehicle if the user forgot where he parked it.
And many more…
It is worth to notice that many useful features are possible only with GPS-tracking, but we found out that a lot of customers are concerned about their privacy and don’t want to have their location tracked continuously.
Preventive Health Services and Quantified Self
Some drivers may want to put some additional sensors in their cars, but many people already wear sensors on their bodies to monitor their health and physical activity — fitness bands, smartwatches, or just mobile phones.
The fact that no global insurance company had created a service competitive to Endomondo, Nike+, FitBit, or Strava, says a lot about industry’s digital maturity. Healthy customers are the best customers for insurance companies and having a channel of frequent communications with health-conscious people, and actual data about their physical activity, would be extremely valuable for insurers.
What if your insurance company gave you a fitness band (in their brand colors) as a physical gadget added as a bonus to your life insurance policy? Something to remind you everyday that your insurance company cares about your health and you should too.
It can be something like Xiaomi MiBand 2 fitness band, which retail price is only $20, and it can monitor activity, heart rate, and sleep.
Xiaomi MiBand
But more important than a band is a mobile app to accompany it. Most popular fitness apps are targeted at semi-professional athletes or users aspiring to become one. With their wellness apps insurers can target more casual users and even users who are seldom doing sports.
The app can monitor steps, exercise and stand-up time, sleep, weight (via HealthKit or Google Fit), and many others parameters. It can even measure work-life balance with the use of geofencing (how much time user is spending at the office and elsewhere). It can present environmental data like air pollution and allergy forecasts. It can motivate users to be more active and reinforce healthy habits. It can reward users for activity and inform them about their progress.
With an app like that the insurer have an opportunity to throw in little bits of educational content about insurance from time to time, to upsell new products to existing clients, and try to gain interest of prospects.
Many insurance companies are also offering medical services, which bring another angle to our app — for example automatic notifications about 
routine recommended medical examinations based on user’s sex and age.
Assistance in Everyday Life
Another way for insurance companies to be more frequently present in their clients’ lives is through Assistance.
Customers call their Assistance maybe once a year, and 2/3 of Assistance holders never do it. People are often simply not sure what they can demand from their Assistance. In Poland less than half of Assistance holders declare that they’ve read General Terms and Conditions of Insurance and 25% declare that they never read it (according to “VIIth Polish Nationwide Assistance Research”).
Now let’s imagine a mobile Assistance app that is designed like a restaurant menu — with a clear list of all the available services. Tap on the icon for a service to read more about it, and you can order it straight away. The app will locate you and call for help.
Services can be (mostly) free for the Assistance card holders, and paid for other users. If you’re not a client you can pay for a one-time service or become a client by buying a one-year Assistance card and have a service for free. In any case the insurer is a guarantee of quality.
Our concept of an Assistance mobile app
According to the previously mentioned survey, while the Roadside Assistance is still the most popular (85%), a lot of people find other types of Assistance useful:
Medical Assistance — 63%
Travel Assistance — 55%
Home Assistance (help of a plumber, locksmith, electrician, etc.) — 24%
And this can be a good opportunity for insurance companies— why not become “an Uber of Assistance”? ;)
There are just a few ideas from our experience of working with many insurance companies (Smart Home — in example — is one of the obvious areas to target next). What is important is that all of those concepts need some time to develop. Managers at insurance companies need to take a break from their short-term targets to pursuit some longer-term goals, if any serious innovation at this space can happen.

K2 Internet is a leading digital product design and communications agency in Poland. We develop digital services, apps and websites with a strong focus on user experience. We have a long-time experience partnering with financial institutions —banks and insurance companies, such as Aviva, Nationale Nederlanden, PZU, Raiffeisen Bank, PKO Bank Polski, Pekao S.A., Getin Noble Bank, and many more.
Thank you! If you enjoyed reading this, please hit ♡ and share! :)
If you want to contact us, please drop me a line: maciej.lipiec@k2.pl

Nightmares that are much scarier now that you don’t have health insurance
he’s all you can afford now
Your teeth start falling out — It’s $50 just to have the dentist look at your teeth. Can you imagine how expensive dentures are going to be?
You show up to work naked — Best case scenario, you catch pneumonia and survive only to find out that you’ve been “fired” from your unpaid internship
There’s a menacing presence in the room and you can’t move — As long as the reason you can’t move isn’t that you’ve slipped a disc or something, menace away!
You scream but no sound comes out — Tonsillitis. My advice? Skip the ice cream after the operation and save a few bucks.
You’re flying over the city and begin to fall — You’re a bird with Avian Flu. Unless a gentle child nurses you back to health pro bono, you’re doomed.
Your therapist, with whom you’ve established a level of understanding that takes years of painfully revisiting your past, is suddenly out of network — Recurring.

The Possibility Effect: why lotteries and insurance exist

I recently finished reading Thinking Fast and Slow, a book on behavioral psychology and decision-making by Daniel Kahneman. One of the sections in Kahneman’s book is about choices — how people make decisions when faced with risk.
Many of us are familiar with the concept of loss aversion. When people are faced with an uncertain, risky outcome, then “losses loom larger than gains.” As Kahneman points out:
“In mixed gambles, where both a gain and loss are possible, loss aversion causes extremely risk-averse choices.”
As he continued to research loss aversion, Kahneman discovered a number of additional key insights. His insights were that (1) the prospect of losing a potential gain creates feelings of loss aversion, and (2) people may actually seek risks when facing near-certain losses. In other words, whether you are facing a gain or loss, and whether you think it’s high- or low-probability, influences your behavior.
Kahneman captures these insights in a concept called the Fourfold Pattern, which goes beyond loss aversion to show the different ways people respond to high- and low-probability events when they are either gains or losses.
This matrix (and all below) excerpted from Thinking Fast, and Slow by Daniel Kahneman
In this 2x2 matrix, the top row contains scenarios that are likely to happen (high probability), either gains or losses. These scenarios correspond to the “Certainty Effect.” The bottom row contains scenarios that are unlikely to happen (low probability), either gains or losses. These scenarios correspond to the “Possibility Effect.”
Within each cell of the matrix, you have the following:
an outcome (e.g. “95% chance to win $10k”)
an emotion that is evoked (e.g. “Fear of disappointment”)
the typical behavior (e.g. “RISK AVERSE”)
Let’s look at each cell in some detail:
High probability gain (“settle out of court”)

This is the situation that is captured in the top left cell of the matrix.
In this scenario, you face a likely gain. You have a 95% chance of gaining $10k. If someone offered you $9k with 100% probability, would you take it? If you’re a student of economics, you would say, “The expected value of my current situation is $9.5k = 95% & $10k. So why should I take $9k with 100% probability? It’s less than the $9.5k expected value.”
But many people would indeed take the $9k with 100% probability offer. Why? They would do so because they feel risk averse in this scenario. Even though the probability is small (5%), the potential loss of the entire $10k looms large. They are motivated by a fear of disappointment: “What if I don’t gain the $10k that is right within my grasp?” So what do people in this scenario do?
Here’s a real-life situation. Imagine that you’re the plaintiff in a civil case, and you believe you have a 95% chance of winning the case and an award of $10k. The defendant knows that they are likely to lose the case, so they offer an out-of-court settlement of $9k. The plaintiff would most likely take the settlement, even though it’s below the expected value ($9.5k) and the full amount they are very likely to receive ($10k).
High probability loss (“all in”)

This is the situation that is captured in the top right of the 2x2 matrix.
You are faced with a near-certain loss — you have 95% chance to losing $10k. But you have some hope — though only a slim 5% chance — of avoiding the loss.
What do you do? Do you “know when to fold,” take your losses and move on? Or, do you go “all in” with whatever you have remaining, in the hopes that you may recover the near-certain loss?
Most people, surprisingly, go “all in.” Here is what Kahneman had to say about this scenario:
“Many unfortunate human situations unfold in the top right cell. This is where people who face very bad options take desperate gambles, accepting a high probability of making things worse in exchange for a small hope of avoiding a large loss. Risk taking of this kind often turns manageable failures into disasters. The thought of accepting the large sure loss is too painful, and the hope of complete relief too enticing, to make the sensible decision that it is time to cut one’s losses. This is where businesses that are losing ground to a superior technology waste their remaining assets in futile attempts to catch up. Because defeat is so difficult to accept, the losing side in wars often fights long past the point at which the victory of the other side is certain, and only a matter of time.”
The next two cells of the matrix illustrate the Possibility Effect — the behavior of individuals when they believe that there’s even a small possibility of a large gain, or a large loss.
Low probability gain (“the lottery”)

This is the scenario captured in the bottom left cell of the 2x2 matrix.
You are faced with an unlikely gain — there’s a small chance that you will gain a significant reward of $10k. Given this hope of a large gain, you become more risk seeking. As Kahneman writes:
“The possibility effect in the bottom left cell explains why lotteries are popular. When the top prize is very large, ticket buyers appear indifferent to the fact that their chance of winning is minuscule. A lottery ticket is the ultimate example of the possibility effect. Without a ticket you cannot win, with a ticket you have a chance, and whether the chance is tiny or merely small matters little. Of course, what people acquire with a ticket is more than a chance to win; it is the right to dream pleasantly of winning.”
Combined with the overconfidence and over-optimism biases, the possibility effect for gains explains why so many people become entrepreneurs or start small businesses. Although only 66% of businesses survive their first two years, and only 50% survive beyond the first five, small business owners become risk seekers because they are motivated by the hope of large gains.
Low probability loss (“insurance”)

This final scenario is captured in the bottom right cell of the 2x2 matrix.
You are faced with an unlikely loss — there’s a small chance that you will lose the large amount of $10k. Given this fear of a large loss, you become risk averse. This is a flavor of the loss aversion behavior that many of us are familiar with. As Kahneman writes:
“The bottom right cell is where insurance is bought. People are willing to pay much more for insurance than expected value — which is how insurance companies cover their costs and make their profits. Here again, people buy more than protection against an unlikely disaster; they eliminate a worry and purchase peace of mind.”
This is why insurance, extended warranties, and protection plans exist. Even though the chance of a loss is small, if it happens it will be painful. Hence you’re willing to pay a small insurance premium to eliminate or reduce the risk.
So what? Why is this all important?
In the business world, we are often making decisions ourselves, or persuading others to give their support for decisions. It’s important to understand some of the biases and heuristics that we have that will affect our decision-making — especially when it comes to risk and probabilities.
The next time you are making a decision or an argument to persuade others, think about the situation. Could the Possibility Effect influence the decision? How should you frame your argument?
If the situation you face is a low-probability loss, pitch your proposal as “peace of mind” insurance. Why not pay a small premium to reduce or eliminate the risk?
On the other hand, if you face low-probability gains, you might observe the group’s tendency to be risk-seeking. If you disagree with the risk-seeking approach, call out the “lottery effect” in the group’s thinking.
By taking a bit more time to analyze the situation, we can make a better decision or more successfully persuade those whose support we need. Keep in mind the possibility effect, the reason why lotteries and insurance exist.

Trump budget boss: If you want insurance to cover maternity care, lobby your state legislature
Trumpcare: Giving you the freedom to purchase health insurance that covers nothing.
CREDIT: CBS screengrab
On Thursday, President Trump and the House Freedom Caucus tentatively worked out a deal: Trump would agree to remove mandatory coverage of “essential services” from his health care bill in order to win the far-right caucus’ support for it.
Essential services include maternity and newborn care, pediatric care, emergency services, substance abuse treatment, and prescription drug coverage. Under the Affordable Care Act, every health insurance plan sold in the US must cover them.
House GOP leaders agree to gut essential health benefits, begin hemorrhaging moderate votes
A short-sighted attempt to appease conservatives could easily backfire.thinkprogress.org
But with no women present, the Trump administration and House Republicans decided on a plan that would allow insurers to sell health care policies without maternity care coverage in states that allow it.
Vice President Mike Pence tweeted out a photo from the room:

On Friday morning — hours ahead of the expected House vote on the bill — Budget Director Mick Mulvaney went on CBS This Morning to defend a bill he’s played a key role in crafting. While on the program, he offered some advice to people who require essential benefits but live in states that wouldn’t require them under the law: If you don’t like it, just move.
The New York Times reports that on Thursday, Mulvaney issued an ultimatum on Trump’s behalf to “recalcitrant” House Republicans asking them “to fall in line behind a broad health insurance overhaul” on Friday “or see their opportunity to repeal the Affordable Care Act vanish.”
On CBS, Mulvaney said that “we have made the bill much better over the course of the last weeks.”
“The point of the matter is this — they know they don’t like Obamacare, people back home know they don’t like it,” he continued. “It takes the control of their own health care out of their hands, it takes affordability away from them and they want something better. What’s sitting in the House today is better than that.”
In response, host Alex Wagner shot back, “Mr. Mulvaney, when you talk about something better, does that include the slashing of essential services, included maternity care, emergency services, and prescription drugs?”
Mulvaney responded by arguing that essential services coverage is really a states’ rights issue.
“States not only have the ability to require those services, many of them already do,” Mulvaney said. “I talked to some folks from the Northeast and it was like, ‘Yeah, we don’t really mind that much about essential health benefits because our states already require insurance policies sold in those states to have that.’ What we’re doing is taking away the federal control of these systems.”

Asked “what about a state that doesn’t do that,” Mulvaney advised, “Then you can figure out a way to change the state you live in.”

While the elimination of essential benefits makes Trumpcare more appealing for some Freedom Caucus members, House Republicans with different priorities argue it has made the bill worse.

And many medical professionals are appalled. Hal Lawrence, CEO of the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, told USA Today that eliminating essential benefits requirements was a “horrible idea.”
“It’s a horrible idea that takes away women’s access to preventive and maternity care,” he said. “What [members of Congress] will do is increase illness, pregnancy complications, cancer and death.”

How I Used Science to Fight Back and Win my Insurance Company.
This post is dedicated to new students starting their graduate school studies today. Basic science skills can also be quite useful in the ‘real world’.
My cellphone buzzed as I was about to leave my house for work. My wife was on the line, her voice shaking: “Yaniv, someone hit us”. She had just dropped off our son at daycare and picked up two daughters of a family friend on her way to school, where she taught. While she was waiting at the traffic light in the left lane, a large pick-up truck with a dolly came in the right lane and made an overly ambitious wide turn (see figure below). Luckily, neither she nor the kids were hurt. But the dolly scraped the right part of the car, all the way from the back wheel fender to the front passenger door of our 2003 Toyota Matrix. The pickup driver did not even bother to stop. He just continued quickly driving and my wife did the right thing by not chasing him with two kids in the back.
The rectangles represent the approximate positions of our car and the truck. The cars shown in the image are unrelated to the accident
I was not too worried: no casualties, which is the most important thing. The car also looked totally functional, including the two doors on the right side (see cover photo of this story). In fact, my wife could even drive the car to her school no problem. The only issues were the scratches and two dents that were just cosmetic. After she calmed down, I asked my wife to give our insurance company a call and report the accident. I thought we would end up paying the deductible and that the car would spend a few days in the garage, which is not a big deal since our policy covered reimbursement for car rental after an accident.
Part 1: Questioning authority
I was stunned when J., the adjuster told me that they are going to total the car. “You must be kidding me”, I said in disbelief over the phone, “This car can drive. It only needs some body work”. He calmly replied that the cost of repairing the car is very similar to the amount they would return if they total the car and there is nothing he can do about it. The car must be totaled. “How much are you going to give me?,” I asked with concern. At that point, he provided a long list of numbers and the method they used to calculate the value of the car. I have to admit that it sounded impressive — a solid system to precisely measure the value of the car. The result was much less impressive to me: ~$2800.
It never occurred to me that insurance companies can profit from their clients’ losses.
What am I going to do with $2800? Buying a similar car was going to cost about 10 grand and I really did not need the ‘fun’ of car shopping. “Can you please undo everything?”, I asked him, “We just want to get our car back. Please cancel the claim and we will take the car to our own mechanic”. “I cannot do that”, he replied, “Once I totaled your car, you are technically driving a salvage”. I was about to declare a total defeat, but thought to give it one last chance. “Is there any way that I can keep the car even as a salvage?”, I asked. “Well, you are the first one to ask me that in 14 years”, he replied confused. “We can give you the car, but then we need to deduct the cost”. “How much is that?”, I asked impatiently. Checking on the computer for a few minutes, he replied “The value of the car as a salvage is around $3700, so basically you will get nothing”.
I could not believe his answer. In probability classes, we teach that insurance works because of the “central limit theorem”. When risk is pooled among many insured, the expected losses approach the actual losses, meaning that the premium is a fair measure of the expected loss plus some profit for the insurer that underwrites the risk. It never occurred to me that insurance companies can profit from their clients’ losses.
“This is ridiculous!” I cried. “You value my car higher as a salvage than a drivable vehicle. Of course you want to total it — you are going to make money this way! Does it sound reasonable that you will profit from my accident?” There was a long silence on the other side of the line. “Let me check what I can do, Mr. Erlich”, he answered.
That evening, I found that J. salvage value was wrong. Checking a few salvage purchasing websites showed that at best my salvaged car would be worth a bit over $1000. How can I trust this person?
A few days later, J. sent me an email that contained a 19-page report about the appraisal of my car. This report also looked super-impressive. It had numbers, charts, and references on how exactly the value of my car was calculated. But at that point, I already developed mental antibodies to this quantitative analysis theater. If they can claim that the value of my car as a salvage is higher than an operating vehicle, anything is possible.

There was also the first sign that being stubborn pays — they increased the return to $3312. On the phone, J. said that he was playing nice with me and decided to not include a few scratches that existed prior to the accident. I thought to myself: Wow! Fifteen minutes on the phone can really save you 15% or more. Just not the fifteen minutes that you think.
Part 2: Address confounders
Feeling motivated by this quick victory, it was tempting to keep poking holes in their analysis. The costs of the prior damages were too complicated and they already gave me something there. Instead, I thought to focus on the Base Vehicle Value that describes the Fair Market Value of similar cars without any prior damage.
Examples of ad entries from the report
The report included a list of 23 car advertisements of similar models that used to appraise my car. In addition to the ad price, it also reported the distance of the seller from my house. My insurance company simply averaged all ads to estimate the value of the car. However, I found it a bit odd that some of the ads were for cars in Connecticut, over 80 miles from my house in Cambridge, in towns whose poverty rates are doubled compared to the Boston metropolitan. You do not need to have a Nobel Prize in Economics to suspect that the same model is sold a bit cheaper in places where income is lower.
“Don’t mess with me. I am a nerd. I actually enjoy doing this and have all the time in the world to keep at it”
Twenty minutes later, I created a graph that presented the price as a function of the distance of the ad from my house. Using linear regression to remove the effect of distance, the graph showed that my car should be worth about $200 more than the value they estimated. In fact, for every mile away from Cambridge, the ads were on average $4 lower. That does not sound like “Fair Market Value” to me.

At that point, J. handed me over to his supervisor, F. I emailed F. the graph and explained the matter over the phone. My line was that as a scientist, I need to reveal the true Fair Market Value of the car before we can proceed forward. The subtext was “Don’t mess with me. I am a nerd. I actually enjoy doing this and have all the time in the world to keep at it”.
A day later, F. sent an updated report. He filtered all of the long distance ads, which raised my return to $3495.

Part 3: Always ask for the raw data
So far, I got six hundred dollars over the initial offer for a net of 2–3 hours of my time. Not so bad, if you consider that this money is not taxable. The Fair Market Value suddenly looked much more vulnerable to the rigors of analysis, so I decided to keep hammering at it. The new report by the insurance company listed now only five ads that were used to estimate the value of my car.
I love raw data. There are too many examples in the recent history of genomics where the raw data and the presented story in a manuscript did not agree. So I decided to call to one of the sellers of the ads. The car was very similar to mine and the report claimed that it would cost $6,979 to buy the car.

Surprise. Surprise. The sale representative told me that this car was just sold for $7,887, almost a thousand dollars above what the report claimed. I took the name of the sales representative just in case.
I sent the data to F. who immediately replied that an external company makes the reports for them and I should speak with them.
I called the external company, but I wanted to record the conversation in order to use it as evidence if needed. Massachusetts is part of the eleven states that require a two-party consent to record phone conversations. No problem — I started the conversation by asking the representative if I can record our phone call. She agreed without hesitation. After presenting the situation, I asked her why there is a discrepancy between the ad and the actual price. Her reply was stunning:
“[T]hat happens quite often. They will list it lower online because it is their Internet sales pricing, which is cheaper than what you are going to find on a window sticker or on the vehicle on the lot”.
Bingo! She just admitted on record that their online ad scanning system is likely to be downward biased compared to the actual selling prices of the cars. I called F. again and played the phone conversation with the report company to him. Again, there was a long silence on the other side of the phone. Then, he told me to wait a few days until he can speak with his bosses.
Four days later, he sent me an email. No more long reports with fancy charts and numbers. He probably realized that this will just make the situation worse. His “final offer” was described in just one sentence and amounted $4561.78.

Accepted!
Epilogue
By exercising grad school skills — questioning the authority of the adjusters, removing confounders from the analysis, and looking at the raw data — I was able to win my insurance company. Their tactics are well-known in science: they cherry picked their data (ads, distance); they tried to overwhelm me with information to make their case; and they insisted on communicating nonsensical results (salvage value that is higher than an operable vehicle value). These are the tricks that bad scientists use. Nothing new — just a different domain.
After I texted the new offer to my wife, her reply had one word: “genius”. I have a PhD, some nice publications, and won a few awards in my life, but she has never called me a genius before. I guess this is the difference between grad school and the real world.

Insurance, meet Reputation: Traity goes #insurtech
For the last few years, Traity has been committed to building trust between strangers. We created the Traity Score, the ReputationAPI, the HandShakeAPI and put your reputation on Blockchain, to help people prove and show their reputation in different contexts and marketplaces, helping them transact more safely.
During 2014 we had incredible user growth, and many sharing economy marketplaces integrated our ReputationAPI so that their users would not have to start from zero stars every time. Unfortunately we were unable sign-up partners like AirBnB or Uber. They consider the reputation of their users part of their competitive advantage, and we failed at finding enough value for our users to use their Traity profile in enough marketplaces.
We still believed that P2P transactions are fundamentally based on trust, and that the economic and social impact of lack of trust on society is vast. Mid 2015 we started to reconsider "What is Trust", "What is reputation", and "where do they really matter". There are two large industries that depend heavily on trust: Credit and Insurance.
Insurance, meet Reputation
As Terry Pratchett put it, "Insurance is betting that something bad will happen". Something is insurable when the willingness to pay is higher than the odds. The problem is that in some cases, the customer can interact with the odds, which is the reason why insurance companies don't trust their own customers.
There are some insurance services that cannot be easily influenced by the reputation of the customer, like Life Insurance or Health Insurance. Reputation cannot predict accidents or sudden illnesses (Fitbit is much more likely to work that out). However there are other insurance services where there is a high level of moral hazard in control of the user, who can significantly change the economics of the insurance product, and here is where reputation matters.
We decided to start with Income protection insurance. Landlord protection is a well known old product, but it's highly inefficient because the price of the insurance is largely related to the rent price of the home. However almost 100% of the risk lies with the tenant. Landlord-Tenant relationships are the largest P2P transactions we make every month, but we simply don't call them “Sharing economy”.
And yet the industry is incredibly opaque:
Tenants know very little about the landlord's previous behavior
and landlords know very little about the tenant's previous rents. 
 This lack of trust leads to large deposits and need for guarantors.
Fixing global challenges through Trust
The deposit is a form of insurance. It's just a very inefficient form of insurance. It's like saying that because you don't trust me, you will charge me $10,000 in advance, for all the things I could break, which is probably 3 or 4 sigmas above the average.
In a world where most people have less than $1,000 in savings, deposits of $5,000+ limit people's access to homes, segregation, and lack of opportunities to a better life in a more developed city or country, since people simply cannot move to those cities.
When I moved to the US, landlords asked me for a $14,000 deposit or a $40,000 bank guarantee because as an immigrant I did not have a credit score. It was clearly a problem of trust, solved very poorly.
Traity goes #insurtech:
Jordi Rivera, CEO of DAS Spain, came to our office to sign the contract :)
I am happy to announce our partnership with DAS, subsidiary of ERGO, part of the giant MunichRe group, and leader in legal protection insurance services, to provide landlord income protection insurance to people with non-traditional forms of employment, without credit scores, young, students, immigrants, or people who hate to pay high deposits to their landlords and would rather hold to their own cash, a.k.a. you.
The implications of this are vast and have important ramifications:
As an example, there are over 3 million empty houses in Spain. Often because landlords don't trust the tenants they might get. The reduced supply leads to less choice, higher prices, higher deposits and significant costs of opportunity to society.
We aim to reduce default rate by about 50% ceteris paribus on the current rental market by selecting great people and creating accountability and trust. By fixing this, many more homes will be on the market, eventually reducing prices.
Furthermore, by reducing the fear of landlords and covering the rent, we aim to reduce the need for deposits, which today lead to segregation and limits access to opportunities.
All of this based on our own reputation scores, on our patented technology of Networks of Trust, FB data, eBay stars, LI social network analysis, AirBnB semantic analysis, to create scores that are not just complementary but superior to traditional credit scores, as we measure behaviors, not static solvency.
This way we will help all those people who cannot easily prove their trustworthiness, maybe because they are immigrants, students, or work as freelancers on Uber and don't have a blue-chip pay-slip to show.
I believe that this is the first of many services we and the whole Fintech industry will be able to provide thanks to reputation. We look forward to delivering on our mission of helping people access all sorts of opportunities based on their trustworthiness.
Starting and Next steps.
Our partnership with DAS starts in Spain first through seguros.traity.com, but the intention is to expand to other economies soon. Once social scoring is validated as a risk evaluation tool, a deeper ReputationAPI integration will take place, so that DAS can better serve their own customers.
This partnership (and others in different countries that we will be announcing soon) is a stepping stone in our development as a company. It gives Traity the opportunity to prove that online reputation and social data extrapolates to our behaviors in "real life". Once this experiment works out, the impact to our society will be vast:
As a global example of what the future could look like for us, Indian landlords can require 7 to 9 months of deposit to new tenants. This limits the ability for rural indian young people to move to the city and find a job. In India over 200 million people have bank accounts, and yet 600m have FB accounts.
Closer to "home", over 40% of the population in the US is expected to go freelance by 2020 (Ask Arun Sundararajan). These people need new options to get access to financial and insurance services, and credit scores won't help them. But we will be there for them.
I often have a David/Goliath feeling to all this. As if we were too small to even dare to have such ambitions; and yet I am addicted to fighting Goliath, falling back to the ground, spitting some blood, and standing up again. Because one of these times, perhaps we will win.

Paytm Auto and Cab partners drive away worries with free health insurance

In India, auto rickshaws and cabs are the pillars that support the country’s last-mile transport. These good folks are always on the road, driving us places. However, due to the high-risk lifestyle, they are less likely to get insurance. We strongly felt this should change, and it did.
We have partnered with TATA AIG General Insurance to offer free cashless health insurance to auto and cab drivers across the country. The new insurance provides them a safety net against accidents and covers their existing health conditions. We think it’s the best way to say thank you for everything they continue to do for us.
The new insurance scheme covers hospitalization expenses. Paytm will pay the first 2 EMIs on behalf of the drivers, while subsequent EMIs can be paid by the drivers themselves using the Paytm App. This is available to auto and cab partners who accept payments with the Paytm Wallet.
We feel this will help thousands of drivers across the country.

Thesis: Cyber Insurance
The world is under attack from cybercriminals. A terrorist, an anarchist, a nation state, a thief and a disgruntled insider all have different motivations to infiltrate your business and expose the secrets, with vastly different financial consequences. Moreover, each company’s risk protection is also highly variable — owning the latest security products may be a false sense of comfort.
Measuring risk is what the trillion dollar global insurance market has become surgically good at, allowing them to effectively underwrite and re-insure complex policies against that risk posture. However, that level of precision is still a massive void when it comes to the world of cyber insurance. The world’s largest cyber insurers today have more questions than answers on how to make this process more efficient. We see opportunity to quantify the end-to-end risk and unify the user experience for cyber insurance products.
Please contact Max Gazor if you are interested.

Insurance Tech Benefits Landlords and Tenants in our Backing of TheGuarantors

Insurance Tech as a sector has seen a surge in funding of 42% YoY in H1 2016 compared to the same period in 2015 with more than 80 deals topping $1B in funding. The market is however still young and we are seeing a lot of room for technological disruption. 62% of the deals in H1 2016 are at the Seed and Series A level, with 63% of the deals coming from the U.S. (source)
One of the subsectors of Insurance Tech that is least discussed but that represents a large market is insurance on rental payments. To avoid ambiguity, we are not talking about renters’ insurance; rather we are discussing insurance on the monthly payments of rent paid by the renter to the landlord. In terms of market sizing, it is estimated that $94B in rent is paid per year in New York City alone with a total of 2.2 million rentals in 2014 (~15% of U.S. apartment rental market), and another $518B rent across the rest of the country. In fact, the renter fraction in the US is 36.9%. The insurance opportunity is rooted in the default rate on these leases: 6% to 35% of these rental leases, depending on the tenants’ profiles, are defaulted.
We therefore see a massive opportunity for technology to help insure these rental leases and we are delighted to announce our investment in TheGuarantors, led by Julien Bonneville.
Evolving in an environment which is seeing a lot of potential growth, TheGuarantors’ solution meets the needs of landlords and building property managers, brokers and prospective tenants by offering renters to be their guarantor for a fee. The company helps landlords and renters to connect, and secure the rent payment over the duration of the lease.
Prospective tenants who most benefit from TheGuarantors include students, recent grads, internationals of all ages & wealth levels, retirees and self-employed individuals. These tenants have every intention to pay their rent every month but, after hunting and finally finding their dream apartment, they are told by the landlord that they need a guarantor to be approved for the apartment. TheGuarantors helps the tenant secure the apartment.
In fact, one the team members of White Star could have benefited from TheGuarantors when he moved to the United States several years ago. Because TheGuarantors did not exist and our team member was an international expat working for an international company, to secure the apartment he had to provide a corporate guarantee from his employer (a complicated task not available to most new renters in New York).

TheGuarantors is especially useful in cities where landlords want to avoid vacancies and where there are high income requirements for prospective tenants to rent apartments. Partners include StuyTown / Peter Cooper Villlage, Moinian Group, Gotham Organization, Silverstein Properties, Eastbridge Group and many others.
In addition to guaranteeing all rent payments at no cost to the landlord, its insurance policy coverage includes industry-firsts such as:
Legal fees up to the amount of security deposit
Holdovers covered up to two months’ rent
Landlords have access to a dedicated portal in which they manage online claims, track processes and see units covered.
We expect that TheGuarantors’ product will also disrupt the existing market for landlords and renters in other large cities such as Chicago, Washington DC, Boston, San Francisco and many international cities. In any city where prospective tenants need to demonstrate financial metrics to be approved for an apartment, TheGuarantors can make the lives easier for landlords, agents/brokers, and renters.
Julien and team are on a mission to transform the rental market and we are proud to be backing them!

What this denial of service leads to is exactly the kind of drug rationing that free market conservatives have been warning about for years, usually to vocal derision from the left. (Photo: iStock Photos)
How the Insurance Market Is Responding to Obamacare
by Gregg Keller
I split my time pretty evenly between Washington, D.C., and my hometown of St. Louis, Missouri. In D.C., if you want to get your fix of crony capitalism or government mandates, they’re only a step away at any time. But if you want to capture a perfect specimen of crony capitalism and government overreach in the wild, it’s a little more difficult out here in “Flyover Country.”
So you can imagine my fascination when an organization called the “Institute for Clinical and Economic Review” announced it was coming to town to give us just such a perfect example. Even the name is perfectly “Kafkaesque.”
In the wake of ridiculous Obamacare mandates, the insurance industry is under tremendous cost pressure to deny its customers access to expensive life-saving drugs. But those insurance companies don’t want to take the public relations hit for denial of these drugs that cost billions in research and development to get to market, hence the Institute for Clinical and Economic Review.
The institute helpfully steps into the breach and, with funding directly from the insurance industry and its allies, produces “research” that even liberals acknowledge vastly limits patients’ access to life-saving drugs.
Essentially, the insurance industry is passing on largely bogus research through a front group, the Institute for Clinical and Economic Review, that gives insurance companies leverage to deny coverage to expensive cures. It’s a perfect example of Washington, D.C.-style self-dealing and crony capitalism.
What this denial of service leads to is exactly the kind of drug rationing that free market conservatives have been warning about for years, usually to vocal derision from the left.
That’s not the only terrifying thing about the institute’s process, however. At the St. Louis event — which was held to determine if new drugs for a deadly blood cancer are worth their cost (despite their ability to extend life) — one of its paid staff helpfully told us that 70 percent of the organization’s funding came from nonprofits.
As if that kind of opacity is supposed to make us feel any better. Shoot, the Center for American Progress is a nonprofit too, but I wouldn’t let those guys change my tire, let alone decide what lifesaving drugs my child can access. That’s one thing you’ll find about the institute: A consistent lack of transparency. Despite its claims that it’s pristinely funded by nonprofits, if you dig deeper, you’ll find that the institute is actually mostly funded by the insurance industry.
But have no fear, we were told by the organization’s representatives in St. Louis! What could possibly go wrong with the Institute for Clinical and Economic Review’s procedures? Well, for starters, how about the fact that its processes have been likened to the British socialized health care system.
Sure to upset my fellow pro-lifers are the implications of quality-adjusted life years — the key to the institute’s methodology to determine the “value” of drugs. Quality-adjusted life years, which are used in Britain to ration drugs, expressly say that the sick and elderly’s lives are worth less than younger, healthier people’s lives.
Opponents will say that the institute’s reach only impacts the private market. And yet, there are troubling signs that its rationing will soon start to infect the public market as well.
And it’s likely that the institute is coming to a town near you. The group’s regional bodies will hold public meetings, like the one in St. Louis, across the country in the coming months, including Los Angeles this month and Portland, Maine, in July. That’s bad news for patients and good news for the insurance companies that benefit from the institute’s manipulation of the media. The institute has effectively sold the press that it’s a “trusted” and “independent” nonprofit.
Not so. Rather, it means price controls. Drug rationing. The tip of the death panel spear. Crony capitalism. Self-dealing. Lack of transparency. Links to European-style socialized medicine. Ties to the Obama administration. And a direct threat to our pro-life beliefs. There is truly something in the Institute for Clinical and Economic Review for every conservative to hate.
Originally published at dailysignal.com on June 10, 2016.

Insurance used to work like this. I don’t know enough about the market to know how it works today, and it has always irked me that I don’t get more of a benefit than I do for leading a healthy lifestyle.
For example, it used to be (don’t know about today because I signed up for insurance so long ago I’ve never been asked again) non-smokers got reduced premiums.
Risky behavior used to be penalized as well. In my 20s, I was actually denied insurance because I truthfully answered “yes” to the insurance form’s question, “Do you scuba dive.” Other risky activities they asked about included motorcycle riding and skydiving (neither of which I did, or at least not at the time).
Therefore, one can assume that the insurance companies had actuarial statistics on risky activities as well as smoking.
I coach cancer survivors in physical fitness. I am all for incentivising healthy lifestyle choices through insurance benefits. This is something that could be tweaked with the ACA. But that is not the same thing as denying someone benefits entirely because of who they are or how they live.
I have always been a physically-active, non-smoking, barely-drinking, safe-driving, low-blood-pressured, healthy-eating, actuarial-table-sweet-spot-weighted person. Yet I still got cancer. Life is not completely in our control.


101 InsurTech Startups Revolutionizing the $4.5-Trillion-Dollar Insurance Industry
Read the full story here.
The young, but extremely vibrant history of InsurTech proves it to be one of the most electric industries to follow in 2017 and beyond. An ever-expanding list of outstanding InsurTech startups is already shaking up the $4.5-trillion-dollar industry by leveraging technological capabilities. The use of disruptive technologies like big data, Internet of Things (IoT), mobile technology, AI, social network and blockchain are gaining momentum and InsurTech firms are looking for a scope to capitalize it.
The rapid growth of InsurTech startups, interest from VC firms and the corporate world served as a sign that the ecosystem has a tremendous potential and requires action to leverage those opportunities. In response to the flourishing startup environment, opportunistic minds have built InsurTech-focused accelerators to nourish the next big idea and the next Uber of insurance.
Meanwhile, hundreds of InsurTech startups around the world prove that the insurance industry cannot move forward without complete revamp of traditional models of delivering insurance products. In various ways, the startup community is reimagining insurance, bringing advanced technologies to the biggest industries around the world.
The following list of 101 InsurTech companies is certainly not exhaustive but contains some of the most interesting examples of forward-thinking insurance solutions providers that target various members of the industry with tech-powered offerings.
Accuscore
Accuscore (former Acculitx) provides world-class expertise for identification of driver risk to the fleet safety.
Find out more here.
Allay
Allay enables companies to work with the broker of their choice to do online, paperless health insurance purchasing and full HR and benefits administration. Companies can ensure compliance with local and federal employment laws, have all their benefits plans in one place, and help employees understand their benefits and self-manage their HR information — everything online.
American Well
American Well offers software, services, and access to clinical services — everything one needs to offer a complete telehealth service — whether it’s a health plan, an employer, or a delivery network. The company’s mobile and web service connects doctors with patients for live, on-demand video visits over the internet and handles all the administration, security, and record keeping that modern healthcare requires.
Amodo
Amodo provides a state-of-the-art customer behavior analytics and usage-based insurance platform. Amodo is a post-revenue company which has achieved a very steady and rapid growth since the very founding date (end of March 2013). With Amodo’s technology, insurers leverage on digital channels and connected devices such as smartphones, connected cars and wearables to acquire and engage new customers.
Analyze Re
Analyze Re’s PRIME.RE platform offers advanced reinsurance technology to unlock new ways of risk pricing and optimization.
AppSichern
AppSichern offers insurance protection for short periods — for example for sporting events, business trips or children’s school trips.
Array Health
Array Health is a leading provider of private insurance exchange technology. Its cloud-based software platform enables health plans of any size to power their own branded online exchanges — a strategic channel that helps them compete and thrive in the post-health-reform world.
BankBazaar.com
BankBazaar.com is a neutral online marketplace that provides instant customized rate quotes on loans and insurance products. The platform allows the user to instantly search, compare and apply for loans, credit cards and insurance products. Since the company partners with India’s leading financial institutions and insurance firms, users have an access to a comprehensive range of policies and rates.
Bayzat
Bayzat is a Dubai-based medical insurance technology startup that offers plans from leading insurers, easy payment and powerful technology to access health benefits online.
BIDU
BIDU is an online insurance comparison platform for insurance products in the categories of auto, health, home and more. The platform aggregates results for leading solution providers to provide the optimum alternative to the user.
Brolly
Brolly is a UK-based personal insurance management app and broker that allows users to manage their policies in one place and understand where they have duplicate or missing coverage.
Continue explore more InsurTech companies here.


Drone Map Saves Insurance Company €99,985,000
Dronotec uses DroneDeploy to provide vital information to insurance companies
By Anya Lamb, Marketing Manager @DroneDeploy
After a disaster, it’s important to clean up and rebuild, but it’s also critical to capture the site as it is so that the damage can be assessed. Drone mapping gives insurance companies a fast, easy way of accurately documenting the scene, preserving key details while letting the process of clean-up and reconstruction begin as quickly as possible.
Emilien Rose, Founder of Dronotec
This case study comes from Emilien Rose, founder of Dronotec, a start-up specializing in drone inspection for insurance companies. After working as a loss assessor in France and Australia over the last 10 years and assessing about 8,000 claims, Emilien started Dronotec in December 2014.
“I created Dronotec because I saw the potential for drones to address issues I encountered in my job as a loss assessor, such as assessing dangerous, large or inaccessible areas, while reducing the risk of accidents,” said Emilien. Since starting Dronotec, he’s discovered many ways that remote aerial inspection can add value for insurance companies — as in the following story.

Trouble in Paradise
Earlier this year, a major fire broke out at a vacation destination on the coast of France and consumed more than 2 hectares (5 acres), destroying over 80 small housing units with damage valued at over 100 million euros.
Once the flames had subsided, the insurance company came in to assess the damage. The sheer size of the site posed a unique challenge. To make matters worse, many of the roofs damaged by fire were made of thatch and were not strong enough to support an inspector climbing on them to inspect damage. The loss adjuster quickly realized that it would be very difficult to get a clear picture of what had happened from the ground.
Although a plane had already captured some photos after the disaster, the photos were not sharp enough to be of much use. The loss adjuster recommended the insurance company use a drone to help assess the area, so the insurance company hired Dronotec to map the site.

Once on site, the drone pilot flew a DJI Phantom 3 and automated his flight plan using the DroneDeploy app. It only took about 10–12 minutes , flying at 55 meter (180 feet) for the Phantom 3 to collect more than 300 geo-tagged photos covering the area. The drone pilot also supplemented the automated DroneDeploy flight with some oblique imagery taken manually using the DJI GO app.
Dronotec then uploaded all the imagery to DroneDeploy for processing. Three hours later, a 2D map and 3D model were complete and available in the cloud. That’s when the real work began.
Click to explore the interactive orthomosaic map
Collaborating to Determine Responsibility
Since the map was hosted on the DroneDeploy cloud, it could be easily shared via email or by hyperlink and became a central tool where the team could collaborate and share findings.
“My favorite thing about DroneDeploy, is that it’s easy to use and easy to share,” said Emilien. [click to tweet]
Information collected on site by the loss adjuster and insurance inspector, as well as meteorological data about wind direction, was added to the plan as notes, comments and measurements. In addition to counting the number of damaged units (80), the map, combined with DroneDeploy’s suite of analysis tools, allowed them to instantly estimate the volume of debris to be removed.
Click to explore the elevation map
In this case, the main issue at stake was how the fire had spread and who was responsible. As the team began analyzing the map, several theories emerged. The first hypothesis was based on the wind direction on the day of the fire, and posited that the fire had begun at a neighboring field on the north side of the housing after burning of old vegetation for agricultural purposes.
The blue arrow shows wind direction the day of the fire. The blue marker and pink markers show approximate proposed origins for the fire.
The lack of fire damage in the field, however, didn’t support this theory, so the team then considered the wind direction again. Clearly, the fire had spread from northwest (top left) through to the southeast (lower right). After looking closely at the the northwesterly-most point of damage, they identified the first few units to be consumed by the blaze and determined that the fire must have started in or around one of the housing units in this area. Since these units were not on their customer’s property, the insurance company could demonstrate that their customer was not responsible for the fire and thus deny the responsibility claim.
The drone map enabled the insurance company to limit their costs to the 15,000 euro technical investigation and deny the 100,000,000 euro claim. [Click to tweet]
When it comes to a disaster of this scale, the cost of the use of the drone — about .002% of the total claim — is trivial compared to the amount of money saved by demonstrating that the customer was not responsible. More importantly, “there was no other way to gather data”, said Emilien.
Aerial photos from the scene of the fire.
Insurance for the Insurer
The high degree of accuracy that drone maps provide helps improve the likelihood of identifying the cause of an accident. In some cases, like in the one above at the French vacation site, this helps an insurance company decline a claim if they are not responsible. But what about when their client is responsible? Even in these situations, the speed and efficiency of drone mapping can help to reduce costs and damages for everyone involved.
In many claims, damages related to “business interruption” represent a significant part of the overall damages being sought. Delays in the site inspection or assessment process can even cause conditions on site to get worse, increasing the overall damage. Therefore, the faster that the insurance company can accurately assess a claim, the faster reconstruction can begin, and the more that downtime — and related damages — can be minimized.
The ability to quickly process claims — and even anticipate them — is especially helpful in the case of large scale disasters where many customers are affected and the company is inundated by many claims at once.
Using drones to capture a highly detailed rendering of the site saves time on two fronts. On the one hand, a drone can dramatically reduce the amount of time that a loss adjuster needs to spend on site and reduce risk of accident at dangerous sites. Secondly, the quality of the information captured, and the ability to easily collaborate on a web-based map can help adjusters and insurance inspectors complete their analysis faster.
“The way I see it, DroneDeploy is insurance for the insurer,” said Emilen. [click to tweet]
By reducing the time it takes to assess claims, drone maps can save insurance companies time and help the insuree to get ‘back on track’ faster.
An Ounce of Prevention
Drones are rapidly being adopted for loss assessment in the insurance industry, and Emilien expects that over the next few years, drones will be used to assess claims almost everywhere in the world. But Emilien’s not only interested in using drones to help assess disasters — he also thinks they have a role in helping to prevent them.
Before issuing a new insurance policy, insurance companies can use drones to inspect properties and verify the risks to be covered by the insurance company. Once risks have been identified, the insurance company can then work with their prospect or customer to mitigate risks and help prevent disaster.
Where to Learn More
Explore our support documentation to learn more about how to use some of the tools discussed above, including:
Mobile flight app
Exporting and sharing data
Annotations and measurements
Elevation tools
Try DroneDeploy on Your Next Assessment
The features mentioned in this post are available as part of DroneDeploy’s customer plans, which start at $99 per month. Learn more about our paid subscription plans or start your free trial today.
Interested in sharing your story about how drones are bringing value to your business? We’d love to hear from you and feature you on our blog. Email marketing@dronedeploy.com to get in touch.

Should I Get My Teeth Cleaned Without Dental Insurance?
My health insurer wants me to sign up for a dental plan, but I’m not sure it’s the best financial choice.
The Simpsons
My last dental checkup was in either late 2011 or early 2012, back when dental care was included as part of my employer-based health insurance package. (These were the pre-freelance years.)
So, when my health insurer sent me an email inviting me to add dental coverage to my Bronze health insurance, I figured I’d take a look.
The package in itself doesn’t seem that bad. I can choose between a $50 and a $75 deductible, which entitles me to two oral exams and teeth cleaning per year at a $20 copay each. More serious dental work, such as root canals, runs in the $400 range, but I’m mostly interested in the teeth cleaning. (There’s this tiny gap between my bottom two front teeth that slowly fills up with plaque, and even though I can knock some of it out by daily flossing, I can never get it as clean as the dental hygienist does.)
The premiums don’t look that bad either, until you add them all up; the $75 deductible dental plan would cost me $30.40 per month, or $364.80 a year. (Probably a little more than that, because I’ll turn 35 in November and transition into the $32.10 per month bracket.)
When I look at that $364.80 figure—plus the copays and the $75 deductible—I feel like it would be smarter to go pay for a teeth cleaning out of pocket, the way I pay for my annual eye exam out of pocket.
The Cost of Getting Your Eyes Checked (When Your Health Insurance Does Not Include Vision)
Last year, I got my eyes checked for the first time since 2011 because I was suffering from a little eyestrain…medium.com
My most recent eye exam cost $184.30. If I can get my teeth cleaned for roughly the same amount, I could save over $200.
Here’s the funny thing: dentist websites don’t like to tell you how much an out-of-pocket teeth cleaning costs. (They don’t like to tell you how much anything costs.) In fact, when you stop looking at local dentist websites and search “dental costs without insurance,” one of the top results is a Billfold article by Meaghan O'Connell:
How Much Should the Dentist Cost?
A few hours before my dentist appointment yesterday, the office left me a voicemail warning me that the insurance I…medium.com
The fact that The Billfold is a top source for “dental costs without insurance” is both proof that we’re awesome and that there is so little other information out there. (It might also be proof that Google knows I work for The Billfold, so I’d be interested to see where the article shows up in your search results.)
Meaghan paid $200 out-of-pocket for her teeth cleaning, and reconciles the expense as follows:
On the walk home I was thinking about $200, and if that experience was worth it. On one hand, NO. On the other hand, what should it cost? I pay $80 for a haircut if you include tip, and this involved scraping plaque off of my teeth, and suctioning spit and blood out of my mouth, and like, getting sprayed in the eyes with whatever they use to do the polishing part (the worst). I don’t think I would perform that service on someone for less than $200, so I accept it.
For me, this whole dental dilemma is less about whether it would be better for me to go pay for a $200 teeth cleaning out of pocket or sign up for the $364.80-plus-copay-and-deductible insurance. (In my individual situation, knowing my pain-free mouth and history of daily flossing, of course I would be better off paying for a teeth cleaning out of pocket, and I should just find a dentist and go.)
It’s more about having no real information on which to make an educated decision except a Billfold article.
There is one more way of getting real information, of course, and it involves calling the dental offices directly. (Yes, it’s worth noting that I almost forgot that I could do this.) I talked to a few dental offices and learned that, yes, a standard teeth cleaning and exam with X-rays will run around $200 without insurance—which does mean that it would be less expensive to just get the teeth cleaning and not get the dental insurance, if I’m willing to trust my gut instinct that my teeth are fine and just need a little plaque scraping.
Would you pay $364.80 plus copay and deductibles for dental insurance? Would you pay $200 for the teeth cleaning? Or would you just keep on flossing and brushing and hoping you were doing a good enough job?

What is the Value of Bond Insurance?
Some thoughts on underwriting standards and the loss of ratings arbitrage
It is remarkable how porous historical accounts of the bond insurance industry have become. Articles written about the industry almost never discuss ratings arbitrage, for example. Ratings arbitrage was the raison d’être of bond insurance before the financial crisis.
These holes in the narrative are significant because what is missing would inform investors about the value of bond insurance in the market now. (This might not be an accident.)
In 2007, roughly half of new municipal bond issues carried bond insurance. (This equates to hundreds of billions of dollars in volume.) The bond insurance industry was decimated during the financial crisis due to their heavy exposure to toxic mortgage-backed securities.
In 2014, only about $18.6 billion of new municipal bond issues were wrapped. Most of this volume is attributable to two firms, Assured Guaranty and Build America Mutual (BAM). Assured Guaranty wrapped $9.9 billion, giving it a market share of 53.5%. BAM wrapped $7.5 billion of bonds, giving it a market share of 40.4%.
One might look at these figures and assume that this is a story about how the industry made a lot of bad bets and two companies are slowly building it back again. That is happening, but the story isn't that simple.
Before the financial crisis, the rating agencies rated municipal bonds on a scale that was unique to the municipal bond market. The rating scales made comparing municipals to other asset classes impossible. Municipal bonds were rated below corporate credits with objectively similar credit profiles.
The rating agencies aggressively defended this practice. They claimed that it was necessary to show “granular” differences between municipal credits since municipal defaults are extremely rare. But this did not reflect how the market used the ratings. State and local governments were unnecessarily penalized with higher yields until Congress forced the rating agencies to adopt universal scales.
These artificial disparities created a captive market for bond insurers, which is how they ended up wrapping half of the market. Insurers were writing policies to cover the risk of default on thousands of credits that had remote chances of defaulting. And somehow they decided to ruin that gig by backstopping toxic waste.
This arrangement had a perverse effect on the bond market. The rating agencies wanted to use a separate scale to show granular differences in municipal credits. The bond insurance companies (that the rating agencies kept in business) actually removed all granular differences in perceived creditworthiness. It didn't matter to investors if they were buying a state with a AA underlying rating and the ability to levy taxes or a barely investment grade conference center. Everything was AAA. Nothing about this structure was healthy.
It wasn't until the destruction of the bond insurance industry during the financial crisis that investors started to look at what they owned and bonds started to trade accordingly. It is unlikely that investors will forget this experience anytime soon.
So what value does bond insurance provide to investors in the current environment? The insurers have been using high-profile defaults like Detroit (and probably Puerto Rico soon) as evidence of the value of their product. And it is true — the investors that had bond insurance in Detroit were glad they had it, because they would have been mostly wiped out by a rogue bankruptcy court otherwise.
But these credits are outliers and that is unlikely to change. It is also worth noting that in cases like Detroit and Harrisburg, the impression that investors were covered facilitated the governments borrowing past the point where they should not have had market access. (This kind of behavior is why downward spirals take longer than one would otherwise expect. Not to mention the fact that these deals involved fraud.)
With the paucity of new supply in the market, most new bond issues are massively oversubscribed. When deals are bound to be oversubscribed, borrowers have no incentive to include strict covenants or pay a premium for bond insurance. Investors will be fighting each other for the bonds anyway. Also, as my friend @StevePendergast observed, “compression of rates makes [the] incremental value of a wrap less important and [the] premium more expensive.
There might still be opportunities for ratings arbitrage of a different stripe, where an issuer has been arbitrarily rated below where it should be. But given how picked over the markets are from a long period of extraordinarily accommodative monetary policy, this seems difficult to do.
So have underwriting practices flipped from safe underwriting to (relatively) toxic underwriting in the current environment? This seems like it would be worth studying. It wouldn't have a large impact on the market as a whole — as I pointed out earlier, this has become a very tight niche.

The rejuvenation of insurance — this is why it matters
Image: REUTERS/Cathal McNaughton
Erwann Michel-Kerjan, Executive Director, Wharton Risk Center, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
Non-specialists rarely think about insurance in their day-to-day life. Most people don’t interact much with their insurer, unless they have a claim — the industry actually has one of fewest annual customer touchpoints.
Yet, insurance is one of the largest industries in the world, with global annual revenues north of $4.75 trillion, including more than $1 trillion here in the United States. And since most of the world is still uninsured, opportunities for growth are significant.
Over the past few years, the industry has been undergoing a transformation — one that is necessary and will have significant impact on the way it operates, its customers, and who the sector leaders will be 10 years from now. More on that in a moment, but first let us review some of the basics of insurance.
The underwriting/asset management equation
The traditional insurance business model for many years was to select risks and charge adequate premiums — a process called underwriting — that will provide a reasonable net profit. Careful liability management was such that underwriting profits were common for property/casualty (P&C) insurance in the U.S. before the 1980s; 40 of the 60 years before 1980 were profitable.
But over time, competition and regulatory pressure, as well as too much unmanaged risk-taking focused on short-term volume growth versus value, changed the landscape. The underwriting part of the P&C insurance model has been mostly losing money for the decades that followed the ’80s: not a single underwriting profit year was recorded from 1979 through 2003 here in the United States. This is not to say that every insurer had underwriting losses year after year, but altogether they did.
So you might wonder how this can be sustainable. The answer lies in assets under management. When an insurer collects a premium, some of it is invested. If investment returns are good enough, they exceed underwriting losses, leading to overall profits. In other words, underwriting losses had been manageable thanks to high investment revenues. But this model has been challenged in the 21st Century.
Two drivers of change
First came a series of catastrophes that impacted underwriting results — think 9/11 terrorist attacks, Hurricane Katrina in 2005, the Japanese tsunami in 2010, Thailand floods in 2011, Superstorm Sandy in 2012, pandemics, technological disasters, geopolitical risks, and increasing number and scale of cyber-attacks, to name just a few. In fact, the average annual cost of natural disasters around the world increased more than 300% from $46 billion over the period 1980–1985, to $188 billion for 2011–2015. And the cost inflicted by cyber-attacks globally is now higher than of natural disasters (although most of it remains uninsured, as of yet).
No wonder that extreme weather events and cyber-risks were two of the top risks in the Forum’s 2016 Global Risks Report. The occurrence of many more “tail” events have triggered a renewed interest in better selecting what risks to insure, under what conditions, and at what price. Moreover, in a fast-changing and highly interdependent environment, risks are becoming more interdependent too, and new risks are emerging, making assessment by traditional actuarial approaches more challenging, if not inappropriate. The past alone cannot predict the future anymore.
The other game changer for many insurers came, more abruptly, with the 2008 financial crisis. It significantly destroyed asset value and led to numerous regulations. Combined with a stagnant low interest rate environment, many asset managers, including insurers, are unable to achieve the investment returns they once enjoyed.
The underwriting/asset management equation, so central to the insurance model, has to be rethought. In other words, insurers need to design and implement strategies that will help them measurably improve underwriting performance again, meet evolving demand and create value.
New strategic thinking towards better risk selection
This new reality has triggered fresh thinking and innovations at a pace that the industry has probably not seen for a long time. Large insurers, typically the incumbents, are challenged by newcomers who want to disrupt the market with new technologies, and are backed by venture capitalists. The word InsureTech, recently coined, refers to technologies and platforms that optimize insurance operations. Last year marked a substantial shift: investment in insurance tech reached $2.65 billion, reflecting the growth happening in the start-up arena for insurance technology.
Large insurers are engaged in an important transformation as well. For instance, American International Group (AIG)’s new chief underwriting officer for its large commercial-insurance unit is not a trained underwriter — he is a data scientist, signifying a sweeping change in the industry. The soon-to-be new CEO of the large French insurer AXA has also publicly stated that improving usage of data and developing predictive analytics will be key to improving risk management practices, strategic decision making and competitiveness.
We are now seeing more companies spending a fair amount of time and money upgrading their risk selection processes, from improving their understanding of their maximum exposure to extreme events around the world (direct, business interruption, contingent business interruption), to extracting information from decades of claims data and combining those with other sources of knowledge. More firms are also moving to directly empower consumers along their insurance journey, rather than relying solely on agents and brokers and on a single annual renewal touchpoint.
More granular, just-in-time and agile risk knowledge is pushing the transformation further
The increasing role of technology is helping insurance companies make smarter assessments of risk and helping their clients be safer, too. The technology is able to aggregate and combine data in a way that is accessible 24/7 and easily understood by busy decision makers. After all, people expect companies like Amazon, Expedia or Google to respond to multiple queries at the speed of light these days. We are all getting use to this “right now” mentality.
One of these start-ups, Maptycs, for instance, has developed new high-performing geographic information systems allowing users to collect and analyze a vast amount of data in a user-friendly, mobile compatible platform. One can now geo-locate and calculate exposure to different types of risks for more than one million physical assets on the planet. Ten years ago, it may have taken a week or more for a team to generate that information. Today, this is done in less than five seconds.
Recent developments are such that any authorized employee can now use a smart phone to receive alerts should certain risks materialize or in a few clicks to perform pre-programed analyses on exposure for all or part of the insured portfolio, and immediately share results.
Digitization progress makes complex analyses and stress-tests of insurance portfolios much easier, reduces operation costs and human biases, help tailor investment in risk management activities, price the risk more granularly and transparently, improve product design, all positively impacting delivery and performance.
This regained emphasis on liability management is true for property/casualty and was shown in recent McKinsey studies (the “Journey” white paper series) to be a key differentiating factor of success in life/health insurance as well.
The ongoing rejuvenation of the P&C industry has started to show results. 2013, 2014 and 2015 were three consecutive years of underwriting profits here in the U.S for the first time since the early 1970s. We will have to see if these results will hold in the face of future catastrophes.
Beyond insurance, risk and resilience are now in the boardroom
The new normal — increased recurrence of severe extreme events of all sorts, growing uncertainty, intensifying regulation, low interest rates impacting asset management, different consumer expectations, better use of modern technology and the quest for resilience — has obviously a much wider impact than just on the insurance industry. As one good barometer, the World Economic Forum annual meeting in Davos earlier this year devoted a large number of sessions to these very issues.
My Wharton colleagues Howard Kunreuther, Michael Useem and I have recently conducted interviews of executives, CEOs and directors of the board of 100 firms in the S&P 500; replicated by colleagues in Germany as well, the research findings confirm that the risk management and resilience landscape is fundamentally changing — how it is performed, by whom, and its increasing importance in C-suites and boards. Once seen as fairly technical and dry, it has now become strategic, and more fun to work on.
Meanwhile, the gap between the top performers who have embraced change and executed on it, and those who have not, is widening.
Have you read?
Can insurance protect the world’s poor against climate change? 
Ten challenges for global insurance regulation
Originally published at www.weforum.org.

Social media intelligence and profiling in the insurance industry…
…it’s not only the price you pay that will be affected

This piece was written by PI research officer Dr. Tom Fisher.
The financial services industry is eager to gather more and more data about our lives. Apart from mining the data they have historically collected such as credit history, they are looking to use our social media profiles to reach into our friendships and social interactions. They are using these data in new and unexpected ways, including personality profiling to determine the risk of lending to you, and thus the price you will pay.
Firstcarquote, a product from the car insurance company Admiral Insurance, is a leading example of such unexpected data exploitation. In a semi-aborted product launch in November 2016, the company proposed to use young drivers’ Facebook posts to determine their personality and use this information to offer discounts on car insurance. Not limited to causing damage to its own reputation, Admiral’s move raises serious questions about the future of the insurance industry.
While Admiral may have been forced into backing away from the use of young people’s Facebook posts to price insurance, the company is still working with companies that are involved in in the business of personality profiling and using social media intelligence to make predictions and decisions about people. Social media intelligence is collecting and analysing data from social media networks, like Facebook; this can include information contained in profiles, posts, images, and metadata like location. Are we ready for the consequence of social media-based risk scoring?
Admiral’s firstcarquote
In November 2016, Admiral Insurance announced a new product, firstcarquote, which used Facebook profile posts to determine young drivers’ personality and risk profile. Media coverage was amplified when Facebook announced the product would be blocked for breaking the terms of their Platform Policy.
The exercise may have been a media stunt for “a fairly standard new app for first time drivers” allowing Admiral to claim on firstcarquote.com it was “Probably the most talked about car insurance product ever …”. After the failure of the first lauch attempt, Firstcarquote then relaunched with a mandatory “login via Facebook” and personality quiz replacing the analysis of Facebook posts.

Personality profiling and insurance
This interest in social media intelligence was not just a one-off flirtation by Admiral. Data from social media is beginning to play a growing role in the financial sector, and Admiral continues to market personality profiling as a legitimate way to offer young drivers discounts on their car insurance.
In relation to firstcarquote, the app still has a mandatory Facebook sign in, but this grants access to “account information”, rather than a person’s posts. Account information is an individual’s name, email address, gender, birth date, current city, and their profile picture. An app that asks for this information is not required to go through Facebook’s app review process.
More interesting and less covered than the app is Admiral’s collaboration with VisualDNA. VisualDNA is a personality profiling company, with a focus on credit scoring for lenders. According to a MasterCard report, VisualDNA’s work in the credit sector measures attributes like “openness”, “neuroticism”, and “emotional stability” to assist with credit scoring, particularly for those “thin-file” customers who had a limited credit history.
Both parties saw this as beneficial partnership. VisualDNA, who having “already proven the benefits of applying our patented and unique psychometric tests to credit assessment” were “delighted to have the opportunity to work with Admiral to demonstrate the power of this approach to other forms of risk assessment such as motor [insurance].” Equally, Admiral believed “The more we know about our customers’ likely behaviour the better placed we are to price risk on an individual basis, giving customers an even more accurate price.”
The depth of the relationship is perhaps seen in the involvement of computer scientist Dr. Yossi Borenstein as “principal data scientist on firstcarquote”, who had previously worked with VisualDNA, where he was head of risk analytics. He has also published on the subject of VisualDNA’s personality tests.
Further, Admiral use VisualDNA’s cookie on their website, although it is unclear as to whether this is for profiling for advertising or risk purposes.
Admiral’s initial press release made a broad claim for the validity of personality testing for young driver insurance: “It’s scientifically proven that some personalities are more likely to have an accident than others.” They later weakened this to “a growing body of scientific evidence that…personality traits can be linked to driving risk”. Finally, as a post on their Facebook page puts it, “So, does your personality affect the way you drive? The short answer is: probably.” But, whether there this is a link between risk and personality for young drivers or not, the use of personality testing, and new data sources, has broader consequences for the insurance sector.
Social media data as intelligence
The use of social media intelligence is a developing field in the financial sector. Facebook’s Platform Policy may have prevented access to the data about people’s posts on this occasion, but the use of social media data to make predictions and decisions about people in the insurance sector is developing.
In this instance, the firstcarquote case attracted a great deal of publicity and Facebook deemed that the initial version of firstcarquote violated its platform policy. It purportedly measured personality by analysing, for example sentence length and use of exclamation marks; words like “always” or “never” (as opposed to “maybe”) could suggest overconfidence; and arranging to make appointments at a specific time, rather than a generic “this evening”, was allegedly a measure of how organized an individual is. Facebook’s platform policy governs how third-party apps can make use of Facebook. According to Facebook, Admiral violated term 3.15, which was introduced into the policy in May 2016:
“Don’t use data obtained from Facebook to make decisions about eligibility, including whether to approve or reject an application or how much interest to charge on a loan.”
Despite this, data from social media still play a role in the financial services industry. This is particularly the case for groups of people who have not had access to financial data before — requiring these sectors of society to be required to reveal more about themselves than others. For example, the use of social media intelligence for loans is aimed at those who do not have an existing credit history — typically, the poorest and most vulnerable. Similarly, with firstcarquote, it was a group without previous access to affordable insurance who were required to reveal more about themselves. It begins to seemthat some groups in society are more able to keep their privacy than others. Is this fair?
One typical example of the use of social media data is the work of Big Data Scoring (BDS), a credit scoring company who took on Admiral as a client in March 2016 announcing at that time, BDS “tap[s] into the broadest source of information from across the Internet, using all publicly available information”.
One of their products, BDS’ Digital Footprint DATA gathers information from a variety of sources that are considered ‘publicly available’, including some social media, blogs, and information through Google searches. It checks information like the device a person is using, and detailed information about their location. We note that the description of the cookie on the Admiral site includes,
“information about the user’s web browser and computer, which pages are accessed on the loan application site, how long the user spends on each page, how the user interacts with the pages and what actions they take during their visit.”
Detecting how a website is used can be a tool for fraud detection, and detecting bots. But cookies gather data on every user of the loan site: the way in which you fill in an online form is becoming as important as the information we put into the form.
BDS’ original product from 2013–4, offered a social media score to loan providers to supplement or replace their existing decision-making processes. After giving access to a broad range of Facebook data — including profile data, status updates, likes, and locations — the algorithm made a decision on the likelihood that an individual would repay a loan. As the CEO and co-founder, Erki Kert, stated,
“All in all, that is c.a. 5,000–10,000 lines of data for each client. …. We often know more about borrowers than their family or relatives do.”
He also downplayed the serious privacy implications of such a statement:
“From applicants point of view, allowing access to all this Facebook data costs just 2 mouse clicks”.
The social consequences of industry shaping human behaviour
Young driver insurance doesn’t just affect the wallets of young drivers: it has an impact on society more broadly. The price of insurance isn’t only a measure of risk: it also potentially affects behaviour. And influencing the behaviour of young drivers is important. Despite making up less than 2% of license holders, young drivers are involved in almost 10% of all fatal and serious crashes.
More traditional pricing has the potential to have a positive impact on the safety of our roads: for instance, by pricing more powerful (and risky) cars higher, it encourages young drivers to choose more appropriate vehicles. While the price of insurance isn’t the only factor affecting the behaviour of young drivers, it is as the very least using another tool to encourage them to use the roads more safely, benefiting us all.
But, think about how basing price on social media posts would change behaviour. Would encouraging young people to use full sentences on Facebook do anything to make roads safer? Where is the social benefit of that?
In fact, we can see a social harm in the using social media in this way in financial services. It can change the way we communicate, which affects us all: it removes the honesty from our communications if we think that it might affect our financial standing. Is a friend posting a message because of a genuine desire to share their lives with their friends and followers, or are they giving a particular impression because they’re looking to apply for a mortgage in 6 months time?
The elements of social control in this can be more insidious. For instance, China is developing a social credit system; this is reportedly a method to influence behaviour online by developing a “social credit score”. Similarly, a lender in India is rejecting loan applications from people who post political messages on Twitter, as the lender fears that it is more difficult to get money back from the politically active if they don’t repay.
The future of the insurance sector
As the CEO of the financial services tech firm ZestFinance, and former Chief Information Officer of Google said in 2013, “We feel like all data is credit data, we just don’t know how to use it yet.”. The same could be said of the insurance industry, but this has consequences for the insurance industry itself.
A 2016 UK Financial Conduct Authority publication on the role of “big data” in the consumer financial market, identified as a risk the increased segmentation of the market, with the consequence that those customers deemed riskier are priced out the ability to get affordable insurance.
The risk can be taken to its conclusion: with more and more data collected, with a strong claim of the predictive power of algorithms, the size of the segments in the market are reduced, eventually to one. In other words, an insurance company would be able to quantify the precise risk of an individual. At some point along this process, insurance as we know it faces an existential threat: insurers are no longer working on the basis of collectivised risk that is at the heart of insurance. Thus the change to insurance, and how it works is a major one — that affects all of us in society.
Conclusion
Despite the measures taken by Facebook, it’s clear that both personality profiling and social media intelligence continue to have a continuing relevance in the insurance sector. This presents a challenge that goes beyond the price that individuals pay for their insurance, and it affects us all. We have to ask the question, is this fair? And, ultimately, there is a danger to the insurance industry itself.
Using social media intelligence in the financial services industry risks affecting how we present ourselves on social media. The selves that we present on social media become the selves that we would present at a meeting with our bank manager: feeling slightly uncomfortable in our Sunday Best, avoiding at all costs controversy, politics, and protest. That is, at the very least, a less interesting world to live in.

For-profit health insurance trumping public schools: HRC 6/100
3 August, 2016 | Index
Dear Hillary Clinton,
Gerard Mclean again, writing to you from my kitchen table in Englewood, Ohio. This is letter 6 of 100. The previous ones are posted online at 100HRC.com as well as delivered via USPS to your office.
On Monday, August 1, my letter contained a dollar amount I will conservatively pay just for medical insurance premiums. The insurance premiums I’ve paid so far this year to the for-profit Anthem BC/BS of Ohio is more than I have paid in taxes to support public education in Ohio all last year. Fewer statistics say more about the values of contemporary America than this one.
What is wrong with us?
Tax dollars educate the next generation of Ohioans. Dollars spent for health insurance premiums do not even provide one hour of actual medical care to this generation.
The status quo in health care policy is bankrupting and killing us. We need your administration — if elected — to focus on #MedicareForAll #UniversalCare #SinglePayer
It is that urgent.
Regards,

Gerard McLean
cc: Sen. Sherrod Brown
PS The offer to have coffee at my kitchen table is still open. Drop by anytime, but call first; the dogs sometimes get excited hearing the doorbell.
Index

More on Family, Caretaking, and Supplementary Health Insurance
Photo credit: Wendy Harman, CC BY 2.0.
In the past two days I’ve shared posts on supplementary health insurance and family, caretaking, and the economy.
The Washington Post has a new story that tries to tie these two ideas together—but discovers the frayed ends don’t quite meet.
I needed to find care for my elderly aunt. What I found was an eldercare crisis.
The call came right after lunchtime. "I've fallen again." My great-aunt Emma sounded frustrated and frail. Her arm hurt…www.washingtonpost.com
When writer A.K. Whitney’s great-aunt Emma falls and breaks her arm, they turn towards Emma’s multiple insurance policies for help and come up short:
But because she hadn’t required surgery, insurance wouldn’t cover the astronomical costs of a rehab center. Nor would the long-term care insurance she’d been paying steep premiums to for years (unlike me, Emma has never been in denial of her frailty, taking care of everything from living wills to DNRs to funeral arrangements) kick in for at least three months. The doctor told us it would only take six weeks (barring re-injury) before she was out of the sling.
I don’t have access to Emma’s long-term care insurance policy, but if I read that paragraph correctly, it looks like people who need long-term care are on their own for at least three months, right? I pulled up a long-term care insurance brochure from Premera to see what they offered, and found this:
You even have choices about how long you will need to wait to start receiving monthly cash benefits: Choose the number of Calendar Days in your Elimination Period — 30, 60, 90, 180, or 365 days.
Then I compared it to a long-term insurance brochure from MetLife:
Typically, you become eligible when you are unable to perform two out of the six Activities of Daily Living (ADLs). This number may vary from insurer to insurer. Also, the period of time when you are unable to perform the ADLs should be anticipated to last for at least 90 days. You will also need to have satisfied the elimination period. Policies start to pay once you are eligible and have met the elimination period.
As you can probably guess, the shorter the Elimination Period, the higher the premium. Of course, even a short elimination period wouldn’t have helped someone like Emma if she were on a long-term insurance plan that required her to be in need of care for “at least 90 days” before they’d offer help.
So what do you do when a loved one needs roughly six weeks of at-home care? Some of us might say “well, that’s where you step in.” Whitney explains why it isn’t always that easy:
Moving in with me wasn’t an option, and neither was me moving in with her. I could help with laundry, groceries, cooking and chauffeuring, but helping her bathe was off the list, since I have physical challenges of my own. It was time to look into home care.
As a thought exercise, consider what you’d do if a family member who did not live in your home suddenly needed full-time care for the next six weeks. Would you be able to take leave from your job? Would you be eligible for FMLA? Would you temporarily relocate? Could you go without income for six weeks? (For some of us, this isn’t a thought exercise—it’s something we’ve already had to figure out. For others of us, it’s something we’re very likely to have to figure out in the future.)
At this point, Whitney gets Emma declared “homebound” so that Medicare will help to pay for some of Emma’s care expenses. However, she and Emma learn that while Medicare will pay for certain types of care, they won’t pay for a night nurse, which is Emma’s “most urgent need.” And no, Whitney can’t just sleep over at Emma’s; they need a night nurse who can stay awake and help Emma when she wakes up in the middle of the night.
So Whitney begins exploring the private market, using Emma’s savings to pay for the necessary care. You don’t need me—or anyone else—to tell you that at-home health care in the private market is both too expensive and not expensive enough; paying $16 or $21 an hour adds up, but learning that an individual home health care worker only gets a portion of that after the agency takes its fees is demoralizing. You might remember last year’s post about a Massachusetts home health care worker union successfully negotiating a $15 minimum wage, in which I quoted this ThinkProgress statistic on home health care workers’ earnings:
They make just $9.61 on average, while a quarter live in poverty and three in five rely on public benefits.
And sure, you could find a home health care worker outside of an agency, but that wouldn’t necessarily lower your own costs—and it would mean doing additional research to confirm that the person you were hiring was both capable and trustworthy.
Emma is fine now, and her broken arm has healed. But, as Whitney explained:
I now understand why one doctor told me a lot of people just wind up putting elders in nursing homes instead of having them stay home.
What would you do, if you were in Whitney and Emma’s situation? If you’ve been in a situation like this before, how did you make it work?

Photo: Stars and spirals, CC BY SA 2.0
The National Disability Insurance Scheme
Looking back to see the future
By 2019, the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) will offer people with significant disability in Australia a measure of entitlement to support, greater choice and control in the delivery of that support, the prospect of much more personalised options and lifestyles and relatively easy portability of service resources across the country.
Some suggest that people with disability have not seen change of this magnitude since the Disability Services Act in 1986, which sought the participation and inclusion of people with disability in community life. Regardless, reforms of this kind are long overdue. The former National People with Disabilities and Carer Council’s Shut-Out Report in 2009 claimed people with disability were “excluded and ignored” in a system that was “broke and broken”.
In 2013, the Australian public massively supported a new system that would cost them an additional levy. In return, they expected people with disability to be given the ‘fair go’ they were due, and a chance to participate socially and financially in community life. The public now expects this change to be relatively swift and seamless.
Very early in the process some people with disability will likely make prompt decisions about their lives and not look back. The experience of the last thirty years, however, suggests much more long-term developmental challenges lie ahead. Change of this magnitude cannot be expected to be swift or easy. Looking back on past reforms offers some lessons that predict future challenges for the NDIS.
Traditional services will find change difficult
Self-directed individualised arrangements espoused by the NDIS have been around for some time to varying degrees across Australia. The change agents in the past who pioneered them were often people with disability themselves, their families and allies as well as some state governments who saw the need for this service approach to evolve. The larger traditional services as well as many equally conventional smaller ones up to the present can be remembered for their reluctance to change their existing practices and models in favour of people directing their own support. Their significant investment in property, fixed service models and increasingly corporate organisational structures gave considerable control and dominance to these traditional services and many people with disability and their families preferred their perceived reliability to the uncertainty of change. It can be expected that these traditional services will again make a convincing case that their clientele should stay in these same arrangements, and many people will — for the time being.
The plausibly realistic hope is for incremental change in the number of people electing to create highly individualised and self directed options as more and more people determine the direction of their own lives. This possible transformation will vary from State to State. Western Australia has supported families and people with disability to self-direct for decades, and the practice is now well established. In contrast, New South Wales has only recently gained a small measure of such experience, and it undoubtedly will be harder for many services to fundamentally change.
Entitlement will not be absolute
The NDIS was launched on a theme of service security and entitlement, and many people may consider this will be an entitlement in absolute terms. The past suggests this will not be the case. Reforms for greater equity and inclusion for people with disability have been consistently underfunded for decades, and although the Government has given priority to people with disability recently, this attention is unlikely to last. Further, governments cannot give absolute guarantees of financial resources. All systems have limitations, and as Australia heads into an uncertain economic future, the NDIS will not be immune.
People with disability will take time to build capacity
People also speak of “choice and control” as an absolute — you either have these or you do not. Choice and control are on a continuum, and a continuum in different dimensions in life. In this sense, choice and control are always going to be issues to be negotiated to some degree. Previous service arrangements in the past gave people with disability little capacity to direct their own lives. The NDIS does offer people with disability and families the opportunity to build capacity to negotiate more options; however, it will be an ongoing challenge, rather than a settled matter. Individual funding and self-direction are not panaceas and there are many challenges involved in making life better. Hence, the question of what other supports may strengthen their hand needs to be more carefully examined.
Funding will not buy a good life
It is also suggested that, if people with disability and families are given the authority, they will know what they want out of life and services will inevitably do their bidding. Funding doesn’t automatically make a good life for people nor does it invariably make lifestyle development and services creative. Both people with disability and services will need courage and help to be creative and to imagine and pursue a better life. Being creative means struggle, discomfort, and doing something different with many errors and setbacks.
In the past, it was hard for services to change and the bigger the service, the harder it proved to be. The impetus for change to this point has largely come from smaller initiatives that worked in partnership with people with disability and their families. It will be hard to bring that kind of quality to scale without additional support for competent community-led capacity development as part of the normal ongoing strategy of the NDIS.
Again, it can be expected that pockets of change will pop up here and there where leaders relish the discomfort and the opportunity to be creative. The change will need to be ground-up and driven by these leaders, small agencies and possible deliberate agency transformations — rather than a top-down prescription for the service system by technocrats lacking experience with what is involved in assuring quality outcomes “one person at a time”. The NDIS will be wise to build the capacity of these “bottom up” leaders — people with disability, families and their allies — as agents of change.
It will be critical to start and stay with the person
Our past service system identified some people as “difficult to serve”. When people are put in the wrong setting with the wrong support at the wrong time, there will be difficulties. The NDIS offers a great opportunity to serve people better, to start with the person, to get the support right and to tailor that support over time. The better an individual pattern of support fits the person, the better the outcomes.
Many programs in the past have begun with a high level of flexibility and, over time, the rules tend to accumulate to form standardised solutions. NDIS will do well to learn from this lesson. It will need to safeguard flexibility and negotiability if practices are to stay focused on the person, and not to fall into the trap of using individual funding to purchase prescribed “same-old” service solutions.
Life is more than services: People with disabilities need friends and allies
In spite of the rhetoric of inclusion and participation in past programs, many people have ended up with little more than segregated custodial care. Not enough attention has gone into focusing on the person having a good life. The NDIS will need to address the fundamental tension between the life goals of a person and custodial outcomes and preoccupations of services. One answer is the rightful and critical presence of natural supporters, people with freely-given connections and relationships with the person. If the NDIS overlooks these, it will potentially subjugate a person’s life to a reliance solely on money and bureaucracy, and deny them the hearts, minds and gifts of ordinary people in the community. Further, it will have betrayed the current public interest in people with disability contributing to society, having a good life and getting a fair go.
Need for ongoing advocacy
It would be naïve to portray the NDIS, formal services and much of the generic resources of communities as necessarily always being faithful to people with disability and their families. Indeed, a more realistic view would be to see them as part of the problem of why life has been so hard for people with disability. Indeed, many reforms in the past have resulted from people with disability and their allies speaking out through funded advocacy support. One needs to ask who will support people with disability in the future to challenge these powerful interests when they do not get it right. Part of the “fair go” moral mandate from the public to the NDIS is to ensure that people with disability are treated fairly and they have the means to make their case.
The NDIS will not ensure an immediate change within the disability sector to self-direction for people with disability and greater choice and control over their lives. Rather, it is more likely to happen incrementally over time. People with disability, their families and their allies will continue to lead the change in small pockets of creativity across the Nation out of necessity because they cannot count on others to do this. The past thirty years are full of lessons of how programs with lofty ideals can lose their way. The NDIS must learn those lessons and people with disability, families and their allies must do their best to shape the NDIS to be their own. None of this will be easy, but great encouragement can come from seeing what has nevertheless been accomplished prior to the NDIS and it is exactly that kind of leadership that will shape its future.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS

MICHAEL KENDRICK
Dr Michael Kendrick is Adjunct Professor in the School of Human Services and Social Work at Griffith University. Michael also works as an independent international consultant in human services and community work with a focus on work in the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom.
His interests, involvements and writings have included leadership, service quality, the creation of safeguards for vulnerable persons, social integration, change, innovation, values, advocacy, the role of individual persons and small groups in creating advances, evaluation, alternatives to bureaucracy, personalised approaches to supporting people, and reform in the human service field amongst others.

MARGARET WARD
Dr Margaret Ward is a Research Fellow in the School of Human Services and Social Work at Griffith University. Margaret has been researching the role of the support worker within the NDIS.
Her doctoral thesis on inclusive housing in Australia informs her role as convenor of the Australian Network for Universal Housing Design. Originally a practicing architect in the area of housing, she became a parent of a person with disability and as a consequence, has had a varied career as a policy writer, service provider and advocate in the areas of social inclusion, housing and disability.
Follow @federalfuture on Twitter

Return to the Machinery of Government

National Insurance bites back
National insurance has nothing to do with insurance. Or benefits. Or anything else. It’s just a half-hidden, non-cumulative, non-relieveable, regressive income tax.

The UK’s National Insurance system is a triumph of marketing over reality. For years governments have been quietly hiding tax rises under the various forms of National Insurance while trumpeting loudly about how low the income tax rate had become.
This week the UK’s Chancellor, Philip Hammond, proposed a modest 2% rise in the rate of National Insurance — from 9% to 10% from April 2018 and then up to 11% from April 2019. The subsequent media storm has been a sight to behold for a 2% rise in a tax that affects less than 15% of the working population. The misinformation about National Insurance even more so. Finally the magical shine of National Insurance has started to wear off.
The Insurance
First let’s dispense with the primary myth about National Insurance — the insurance bit. National insurance is a weekly tax that is a throwback to the days when people were paid weekly in brown envelopes. That structure still exists in the system in the form of NICs (National Insurance Credits), which are still credited on a weekly basis. You get these if your earnings exceed the Lower Earning Limit of £112 per week. As soon as you go above that in a week you get a National Insurance Credit. If you don’t, you don’t get a credit. Older people still call these ‘stamps’ — because they used to be physical stamps on a card.
To get a full year’s increment on your state pension you have to have 52 credits in a tax year. If you have 51 or fewer you get nothing. (Don’t ask how I know this).
You’ll note that I haven’t mentioned any money changing hands yet — and that’s because no money does change hands to get the credit. There is a 0% band between £112 per week and £155 per week that gets you the national insurance credits. In other words they are free if you qualify.
This is the standard employee NI system — known as class 1 National Insurance. It doesn’t apply to the self-employed. They have their own system known as class 2 National Insurance which is currently £2.80 per week, but which is due to be abolished in April 2018 and replaced with a 0% profit band that is the same as employees on an annualised basis.
So once Philip Hammond’s changes go through, the self employed will be on the same credit basis as the employed.
So there is no insurance charge. Just a stupidly complicated and convoluted credit system half of which is there for historical reasons.
The Benefits
Much has been made about how the self employed get fewer National Insurance benefits than employed people do. It’s not really true. As the Citizen’s Advice Bureau puts it:
Class 2 contributions count towards the same benefits as Class 1, except that Class 2 will not usually count towards contribution-based Jobseeker’s Allowance.
Contributions based JSA means that your savings and partner’s income are disregarded when calculating the amount of Universal Credit you receive during periods you’re out of work. (The minimum income assumption is more insidious if you’re self-employed and that has nothing to do with National Insurance).
Payments of Holiday Pay, Statutory Sick Pay and even a chunk of Maternity Pay are actually funded by employers out of their own pocket as a statutory requirement. Add in the 3% pension contribution tax and you can see why employers want everybody to go self-employed.
Employers insure employees against sickness, maternity, holidays and additional pension, not the state.
The Tax
Which leaves National Insurance as just a tax, and quite a pernicious one at that.
Firstly it is levied weekly for employees, so if you’re weekly paid and get a bonus payment then you end up paying a huge amount of tax even if you don’t earn anything else that tax year. (Don’t ask me how I know this).
So it’s non-cumulative over the tax year.
If you have any expenses or allowances under the tax code, they don’t affect the amount of National Insurance paid. If you make a pension contribution personally as an employee you still pay National Insurance on that contribution, but not income tax. To get around this, you have to mess around doing ‘salary sacrifice’ so that you pay an employer contribution instead. If you didn’t want your employer to know about your pension contributions, you get to pay the tax. So much for personal pensions.
Similarly with the new childcare accounts vs. childcare vouchers or employer provided childcare.
So it’s non-relievable over the tax year.
The amount of National Insurance paid for employees is higher than income tax, but half of it is hidden as ‘Employers NI’.
A typical median salary person earning an additional amount of £100 will get £68 in their pocket and cost their employer £113.80 in total. That’s £20 of Income Tax and £25.80 National Insurance — split into £12 on the employee side and £13.80 on the employer side.
The overall tax rate is 40.2% of the cost to the employer of which National Insurance is 22.6%.
So it’s a half-hidden income tax that is 30% higher than actual income tax at the marginal basic rate.
To top it all, if your earnings are above £43,000 per annum, you end up with £58 in your pocket on that £100 rather than £68. Not quite the doubling in tax rate that is advertised for the Higher Rate.
Yes, as a wealthier person you get a reduction in your employee National Insurance — from 12% to 2%.
So it’s a regressive tax as well.
Which brings us to what the government is actually proposing for the self employed. The self-employed pay class 4 National Insurance as a pure tax, and currently pay class 2 National Insurance of £2.80 a week. Like this:
Current self employed National Insurance Regime
From April 2018 the existing proposal was to scrap class 2 National Insurance completely, saving the self employed £145.60 per year, which makes self employed National Insurance work like this:
Future self employed National Insurance regime
The Chancellor in his March 2017 budget proposed increasing class 4 National Insurance from 9% to 10% to coincide with the elimination of class 2 in April 2018 and then increase class 4 further to 11% in April 2019. This claws back the class 2 reduction previously announced.
A self employed person will only pay more National Insurance after April 2018 if they earn over £22,620, and over £15,340 after April 2019. Below that they are up on the deal.
If the median income self-employed person earns the £113.80 that an employee costs an employer, they will pay £11.38 National Insurance after April 2018 and £12.52 National Insurance after April 2019 — compared to £25.80 for an employee. Still a saving of £13.28 over an employee.
There are lots of advantages to self-employment, including saving a lot of National Insurance, but really it should be the clients of the self employed that fund the flexibility and the associated risks, not the state via tax breaks.
The politics of tax rises have become so toxic that chancellors are always trying to hide things in the shadows. Eventually that bites. Perhaps now National Insurance will be finally scrapped and rolled into a genuinely progressive Income Tax.

The biggest issue at this point is insurance won't cover the tests, and doctors I need and the costs are out of control. I had to switch to an HMO because Obama Care eliminated the PPO plan I was on, and I can’t afford the plan I need which would be upwards of $600–800 per month. Even if I win the lottery tomorrow it still wouldn’t necessarily get me to the doctors or tests I need because many of the decent doctors in the Bay Area no longer accept insurance.
The other issue is the health issues I’m dealing with are mostly ignored or misunderstood by Western medicine. I desperately need to see a naturopath, and I’ve seen one through my insurance in the past but my problems simply cannot be solved with a 30-minutes doctors appointment and she was young, stressed out, and seemed inexperienced. I was hustled in and out without resolution. The only people who will even give me an hour of their time won’t take insurance, and the cost of the tests I need are in the hundreds if not thousands of dollars and are not covered by insurance. I just can’t justify the expense right now to definitively know what’s going on.
I’m literally to the point where I just experiment with different herbs and remedies I research online and see if they help, because its cheaper to buy a $20 bottle of some herbs then it is to spend $350 for a Dr.’s appointment, and another $450+ on tests. If the tests confirm what I think is going on, it will be hundreds of dollars per month to resolve, and additional doctors appointments and tests as well.
What it ultimately comes down to is I can either pay for insurance and not get the care I need, or not have insurance and use the money to see the doctors I need. But if I do that, I will get fined by the IRS potentially until the Trump admin figures out this whole Obama Care nightmare.
At this point I’ve figured out the right combo of supplements and herbs to keep me functional, but I’m unable to get a proper diagnosis and fix what is wrong. Meanwhile, I’m paying out of pocket for a chiropractor right now just so I can even use my computer and be able to work without being in as much pain.
I’m managing but the system is so broken that petitioning the insurance companies wont help me.

Why You Should Not Escrow Your Taxes and Insurance
We recently refinanced a mortgage and somehow in the raping of many trees, I overlooked the page that allowed me to choose whether or not to escrow my taxes and insurance into my mortgage payment. If I had caught that page, I would have OPTED OUT but I guess my head was in the clouds that day.
If you are new to mortgages, here is what I’m talking about: Your monthly mortgage payment includes a principal payment plus amortized interest. The mortgage company usually gives you the option of paying a few hundred dollars extra per month so that they can keep that money in an escrow account to pay your annual property taxes and homeowners’ insurance. Isn’t that so kind of them?
Well, not really. They do not do this because they are kind. They do it for two reasons:
They are CYA‘ing. If you do not pay your property taxes, the city will take priority in a lien against the house (in most states). This means that if your house has to be sold at auction or foreclosed on, the city will get paid back first before the lender. The lender has no guarantee of being repaid in full. They get whatever scraps are left over from the emergency sale. The lender obviously doesn’t like this option.
They are also making money on your escrow account. Let me explain this.

I am not a lender so I am not 100% sure that the lender earns interest on your escrow account, although my insurance agent assures me that they do. But I do know that they do not have to pay YOU any interest whatsoever so you could be keeping thousands of dollars in this account per year, earning ZERO on it. Plus, they pad this account to make sure they have enough for these bills. The law allows them to estimate the total of taxes and insurance and add 1/6 more.
With this high cash reserve from your escrowed money, the bank can now lend out more money and make more money on those loans based on our system of fractional reserve banking.
I live in a very high property tax rate county. Taxes for homes in my area are regularly assessed at $20,000 per year. So do the opportunity-cost math for where you should put that $20,000 before it comes called up by the tax man.
Some interest-bearing account > 0 interest-bearing account
In some cases, the lender requires you to use an escrow account and charges you a one-time set-up fee to boot. But often you are given an option and if you are given the option, I suggest you opt out in the interest of maximizing the power of your dollars! Have the discipline to save this money yourself, put it in an interest-bearing account, and then you’ll have some extra dough left over to ease the pain of your tax bill.
Since I had neglected to do that on my recent refinance, I had to request to opt-out after the loan had closed by sending an actual fax. So old school! (Incidentally I do this with an iPad app called iFax. Comes in handy from time to time.)
Thankfully I really like our lender and they were super cool about this request. They dissolved the escrow account within a week and sent me a refund for the money they had been holding in there. My insurance agent was shocked that they were so breezy about it.
“If you were with Wells Fargo or one of the other big banks, I doubt they would have let you do that,” she said. “It’s getting increasingly hard to get the banks to give up a single penny because interest rates are so low and they are not making enough money on their loans.”
She makes a point!
She cautioned me that when that tax and insurance bills shows up, I should pay them pronto because if the bank gets an opportunity to pay it, they’ll jump at the chance to escrow me up again. Not sure if that is true but okay.
What about convenience?
I grant you, an escrow account is convenient. If you have not saved enough in taxes and you get that ugly bill in the mail, it puts a world of hurt on. And your property tax bill isn’t something you can affect very much, other than arguing with the city about your home’s value. For the most part, the government digs its heels in and makes you pay what they demand. Same with insurance bill. The cost is the cost and it is usually a high cost for homeowners.
If you really think you need to be forced to save this money inside of an escrow account, I applaud you for knowing the extent of your willpower. But if you are trying to play the smartest you possibly can with every dollar you spend, you already know the logical choice.
One last note of caution: Your lender does not know for sure how much your taxes and insurance for the next year will be. The city assesses tax values annually and your insurance rate can change too. Your lender estimates this amount and then pads the number in the escrow. They are required to disclose this to you. Look for this in your statements and make sure they are not holding too much of YOUR money.
Okay I’m done on this subject. Would love to hear what any experienced lenders have to say about this! You know how to respond so do so! Or subscribe to my mailing list by clicking here.

Disclaimer: Natali Morris is not a certified financial advisor. She is an autodidact. She writes this blog to chronicle and share her self-guided education about personal finance. She is not selling financial products or recommending that you do anything other than educate yourself on the various options about finance that took her years to discover and leverage. She wants you to be in the drivers’ seat and do the best you can with the money you make, ’til death do us part. Amen. You may kiss the bride.

Health insurance CEOs are inept: HRC 21/100
18 August, 2016 | Index
Dear Hillary Clinton,
My name is Gerard Mclean, from Englewood, Ohio, ten miles north of Dayton, 68 miles west of Columbus, at the Crossroads of America where I70 & I75 meet. I’m writing you 100 letters, one for each day between your nomination and election. This is the twenty-first. The others can be found in your USPS mailbox or online at 100HRC.com
In my Wednesday letter, I mentioned an article that was published in the New York Times that I just can’t get out of my head. It outlined why health insurance companies felt they needed double-digit increases for 2017.
This is an industry that no longer needs to provide a product to cover anyone over 65. With the ACA, it has the Federal Government marketing its products via the Marketplace, does not need to market to anyone under 27 as their parents take care of that AND are guaranteed we will buy their products because of the individual mandate. In short, most of the common business problems we small business owners stress over are being done for them; marketing, sales, collections.
Yet, they justify the outrageous CEO salaries and perks because they reflect “the size and complexity of our business.” I’m confused about what complex problems the highly compensated CEOs are now expected to solve. Aren’t you?
I think Americans are quickly coming to the conclusion that private, for-profit health insurance corporations are simply inept at basic business. Why are we continuing to reward them for their incompetence by supporting them and approving their increases?
Universal Care, Medicare For All. Let’s roll.
Regards,

Gerard McLean
cc: Sen. Sherrod Brown, Elizabeth Warren
Index

Hi…this is your auto insurance company and your car tells us you’re a shitty driver — Now, about those premiums.
The Emergence of Driver Performance Monitoring
HLSensory Overload: We’re Everywhere You’re Going To Be

The sign on the back of commercial vehicles often reads “How am I driving, call 1–800–555–1212. Safety is our priority”. We could assume that the majority of calls, if not all, received on customer service lines such as this one contain a wide range of complaints, most of which probably pertain to the truck being in someone’s way, or rude behavior, but not likely true safety concerns. While the idea of providing a resource to report bad driving seems like a good one, it is truly subjective and could lead to unnecessary discipline for drivers. But, oh well…too bad for him. That’s what he gets for getting in my way. However…
What if your mother-in-law backseat driver was replaced by artificial intelligence?

Now you are the one that is being monitored every time you get behind the wheel, and your car is a 4,000 pound stool pigeon. Driver performance monitoring is the official term, which is also known as vehicle telematics, for the use of remote sensors that capture everything a driver does, which is also a known form of artificial intelligence. Today, subjective customer service experiences can be compared with empirical data to give a fuller picture of what a driver did — or didn’t do — at any given time, if equipped with this monitoring technology. Whether you feel you were going too fast for conditions or not, the sensors in the vehicle will get the last word.
Driver performance monitoring collects various sensor-information from a vehicle and then transmits the data to a server. The server then analyzes the data based on established standards for performance and then issues alerts or reports when variances are recognized. Controls such as speed, braking, how many “Gs” were pulled in the curves, force on the brakes, use of turn signals, horn activations, cameras (back up cameras), AVL/GPS data, etc. are all collected and coordinated, so that a virtual digital picture can be presented that illustrates the performance of the driver.
In the case of public safety personnel, other sensors such as dashboard and body cameras, use of emergency lights and sirens, activation of a shotgun/rifle release, or emergency assistance buttons can be included in the sensor data collection. Instant alerts can be sent when various actions occur altering supervisors to unusual activity, such as an emergency assistance button activation or release of a shotgun/rifle.
Diagram of all vehicle components than can ultimately be monitored via telematics
Driver monitoring systems can be an excellent tool for helping vehicle operators improve driving performance, evaluation of recognized problem operators, and identification of operational practices or situations that lead to variances in driving. Unfortunately, the collection of data can also be used against an individual and may prove difficult to contest unless specific policies and procedures are in place. These policies and procedures should reflect that this data alone should not be used for certain levels of discipline, such as termination.

Safety and efficiency are the core principles behind driver performance monitoring. The collection of data can enable a vehicle fleet manager to assess fuel consumption, evaluate the length of time vehicle brake pads need replacement, traffic impacts, and manufacturer defects.
You can have my data when you pry it from my cold, dead, oh, never mind.
The collection of sensory data is likely not something a driver will be able to avoid. Government and private-sector employee will be governed by their organization’s policies. These policies will recognize that the organization can legally collect and share data that protect their corporate / mission interests. The embedded manner of these sensors into the vehicle will be difficult for drivers to bypass and the drivers that no not follow these policies will be subject to discipline, which could possibly include termination.
Every-day drivers are not immune to data collection either. Many insurance companies and car rental service track driver performance as a mechanism to determine rates, risk, and to monitor driver performance in accordance with their rental agreement. Variances from what was specified in microscopic text in a fifteen-page electronic rental contract could prove costly in fees, damages, or premium rates to the customer. All new passenger vehicles are equipped with an Event Data Recorder, (EDR or “Black Box”), which records speed, brake use, seat belt use, airbag status and lateral acceleration of the vehicle. Theoretically the data belongs to the driver of the vehicle, but, depending on which state you live in, the data may be accessible by everyone from the police, to insurance companies, to lawyers who file for it.
Click here for a list of rules by state:
http://www.ncsl.org/research/telecommunications-and-information-technology/privacy-of-data-from-event-data-recorders.aspx
If you have opted for connected services like OnStar or Hyundai Blue Link, much of this same data is being systematically streamed in real-time back to a data center, along with your current position and speed, as well as other details, such as where and when you parked your car.
Now if they’d only come up with a way so your car could automatically narc on that jerk truck in front of you…

http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/uk-world-news/watch-incredible-skills-ambulance-driver-5690073


When insurance is a privilege
My parents *almost* didn’t have maternity coverage with their first pregnancy. If they hadn’t, it would have ruined them financially, and there’s a chance our family would have been in poverty, at least temporarily. There’s also a chance my sister wouldn’t have survived her birth.
But they had insurance, so that alternative reality never happened.
Technically, my mom wasn’t eligible for my dad’s company maternity coverage, because she was already pregnant when he started work. (That, btw, was because her Dalkon Shield had failed her, along with enough other women that it became the largest class action medical lawsuit of its era.) But someone advocated on their behalf and the coverage was approved.
It turns out it was needed. Badly.
My mom went into labor at 28 weeks. While she was in labor they discovered she was carrying twins (her suspicion all along but her doctors didn’t believe her). Both babies were born and immediately put on the highest level of life support — back in 1973, this was the edge of viability and if my sisters hadn’t been born in Manhattan, where they had the newest technology and procedures, they likely both would have died. Frances did die after a day of intensive care. Katherine spent the next 3 months hospitalized with round-the-clock care. She survived unscathed and is healthy today with a healthy, born-full-term kid of her own.
The experience was traumatic and horrible, but it could have been so much worse. The cost of all of this care would have easily plunged my parents into debt it would take decades to climb out of, or forced them into bankruptcy right at the start of their adult lives.
If I go back to the beginning of this scenario and imagine that they hadn’t bent the rules to give my parents the health insurance they needed, it is so easy to imagine how differently things could have gone.
This was back in 1973, but these days the out-of-pocket cost of a NICU bed in New York City if you don’t have insurance is at least $10,000 to $20,000 a day. Obviously, if you have twins you have to double that. This is how people end up with million dollar medical bills.
This would have caused massive stress (on top of the stress of most likely losing two babies). And stress gets into the body and can make you sick. It can also make you higher risk for preterm birth. Which means this whole scenario was likely to repeat in their next pregnancy (which resulted in me). Except this time they would have even fewer resources to deal with unexpected expenses, because they would already be broke and in debt. And as it turned out, although I was born full term, I also came with my fair share of unplanned medical expenses in my first couple years. And the hole would deepen.
Disparities in access to insurance widen disparities in wealth and cascade into disparities in health. If you start pregnancy healthy and with a proper safety net, you have both a better chance of a healthy pregnancy, and more resilience and resources if the unexpected or unthinkable happens. Countries that make big investments in universal coverage are doing this in large part because of this reality. Lack of insurance stunts any possibility of prosperity for those unlucky enough to need it when it isn’t there. That sets off a cascade effect that puts an ever increasing drag on families, communities, and our whole economy.
We need to agree to pay for all people’s maternity and newborn care as a society and a country, rather than relegating this to those fortunate and wealthy enough to have insurance coverage. It’s not just the right thing to do, it’s the only sustainable thing to do and it’s necessary if we are ever going to have a hope of ending disparities.
This issue is one of many reasons I’m participating in the March for Moms on the National Mall on Mother’s Day. We will be visiting legislators the Friday before (May 12). Please join us in DC or in your own community.

Photo credit

National Disability Insurance Scheme & social advocacy
Four challenges
by Dr Margaret Ward
Photo Howard Lake, CC BY SA 2.0
The implementation of the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) brings hope to people with disability and their families in their struggle for an ordinary life. It also brings new challenges to disability social advocates.
The NDIS has the ambitious goal of supporting the independence, and social and economic participation of people with disability by affording them choice and control in the planning and delivery of their supports. Put simply, the NDIS facilitates a shift in power from the service industry to the person with disability.
Australians think the NDIS is a good idea. They want people with disability to have a fair go and they consented to an increase in their medicare levy without a whimper.
Nevertheless, the disability sector understands this shift in power will not occur without a struggle, and the nation’s economic woes will eventually bite. The NDIS will require social advocates to keep the scheme ‘on song’.
Wolf Wolfensberger defined social advocacy as “speaking, acting, and writing on behalf of a disadvantaged person or group — to promote, protect and defend their welfare and justice”.
Social advocacy is not for the feint-hearted and Wolfensberger suggests advocates can be effective only if they have minimal conflict of interest, are primarily concerned with fundamental needs, and can remain “emphatically and vigorously” loyal and accountable to the people for whom they are advocating. He cautions newcomers that social advocacy comes at a high personal cost — you don’t always win.
In some countries, social advocates are imprisoned, tortured and killed as a matter of course. This is unlikely to happen in Australia, but many people have paid a high price for their advocacy to close institutions, to include children in regular schools, to get into buildings, or to seek justice through the courts.
Some of the best individual advocates are people with disability and their families themselves. They have little to lose except their money, dignity and reputation and much to gain.
The best systemic advocacy continues to be done by community organisations that have remained focused, tenacious and independent.
Certainly, governments would not have addressed the dire state of the private hostel industry, developed a guardianship regime, closed many of its institutions or considered an NDIS without compelling arguments from disability advocacy organisations.
The Hawke Government in 1986 understood that social advocacy was critical to keep its disability programs effective and relevant, and allocated funding accordingly. With the devolvement of the disability program to the States and Territories in the 1990s, state-based funding also became available.
By taking government funds social advocacy organisations had greater staying power, but they discounted Wolfensberger’s advice — have minimal conflict of interest. In this brave new world of austerity and economic rationalism, the NDIS now throws four new challenges to social advocates in the disability sector.
The first challenge is that the NDIS will rely on market forces, in the main, to ensure the effectiveness and relevance of disability services. People with disability have control over their funds and can choose who serve them, and they won’t use services that neglect, exploit or abuse them. ‘Choice’ and ‘control’ work well for those who have the capacity to envision a good life, direct their supports and stand up for themselves. They do little for those who do not have this capacity, are socially isolated, or have come to accept a diminished lifestyle after years of struggle and disempowerment. These folk are now at risk of blame, neglect and even abandonment because they do not use the power of choice afforded to them. It will be left to social advocates to promote, protect and defend their welfare in a world that is likely to judge them as undeserving.
The second challenge is that the NDIS will adopt an insurance-based approach, informed by actuarial analysis to ensure its long-term sustainability. Economist and academic, Jack Frisch, advises advocates to understand this new language of disability economics. Australians will be watching how their contributions are spent. Social advocates will be required to provide solid economic reasoning to support their arguments for human rights and social inclusion.
The third challenge requires advocates to take a broader focus than disability. The success of the NDIS depends on active engagement by mainstream sectors, including health, education, housing, business and transport. The Council of Australian Government’s National Disability Strategy 2010–2020 lays out a bold plan for this to happen. In 2015, the Strategy resembles a ‘toothless tiger’ with little accountability built in for the three levels of government involved. Social advocates will need to keep the pressure on, and remind them that the building of good lives for people with disability is everybody’s business.
The fourth challenge calls for greater financial independence. The recent withdrawal of government funding from many peak organisations does not bode well for social advocacy. It is time to think how advocacy can be done without government grants. Social advocates have demonstrated their power, tenacity and grit. They will be even more powerful once they have financial independence. During this interregnum of hope before the NDIS rolls out, social advocates would do well to position themselves in a new lean way to take on the issues that the NDIS and the harsh economic environment will bring.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR

MARGARET WARD
Dr Margaret Ward is a Research Fellow at the School of Human Services and Social Work, Griffith University in Brisbane, Australia and has been researching the role of the support worker within the NDIS.
Her doctoral thesis on inclusive housing in Australia informs her role as convenor of the Australian Network for Universal Housing Design. Originally a practicing architect in the area of housing, she became a parent of a person with disability and as a consequence, has had a varied career as a policy writer, service provider and advocate in the areas of social inclusion, housing and disability.

Return to the Machinery of Government

After about 4 months without insurance, you will have not spent an amount of money equivalent to the extra 30% you will pay for a full year. Any coverage gap longer than 4 months is fully compensating for that surcharge — “incentivizing” 4+ month gaps.
It sure doesn’t “incentivize” becoming insured, anyhow. How does this pay for the requirement of covering pre-existing conditions?


How to get startup insurance & avoid getting sued in to oblivion
Editor’s Note: After we wrote about how we spend our money, people started asking how startup insurance works. Baremetrics is a happy customer of Founder Shield, who helped us get our insurance setup, so I asked Carl to help me put together a post to demystify some of the murky water that is business insurance. I hope this is helpful to you & your company! — Josh Pigford
The world of insurance is, seemingly, a black hole of conflicting information and sleazy salespeople who are trying to dupe you into buying something you don’t need. And between generating some good user traction, flushing out the revenue model, or closing the Series A round, insurance falls way down the list of important to-do’s.
However, proper business insurance coverage can be critical to — and often a requirement for — a startup’s success.
Here’s a breakdown of the seven main types of business insurance startups need, when you need them, how much to get, how much it will cost you and how to get them. This isn’t an exhaustive list of every kind of insurance available, but it covers the scenarios that most startups will face at some point in the life of their business.
Insurance types covered…
General Liability Insurance
Worker’s Compensation Insurance / Disability Insurance
Errors and Omissions Insurance
Cyber Liability Insurance
Key Person Insurance
Employment Practices Liability Insurance
Directors and Officers Insurance
General Liability Insurance: When a helpless child chokes on your metrics dashboard
General liability insurance is what most founders think of as “slip and fall” insurance, but it actually goes way beyond the simple office mishap.
General liability insurance covers all kinds of bodily injury and property damage caused by your company and includes the actions of your team members outside of the office as well as the use of your products by your customers.
Claim examples…
Your sales rep spills coffee on a client when meeting at a coffee shop, causing severe burns.
A child chokes on the connected wearable device you’ve designed and marketed.
A competitor sues for defamation, libel, or even copyright infringement based on the content of your website or your advertising campaign.
You’ll need this when you…
Start your company. Policies are usually inexpensive for startups (as low as $500 annually) so there’s no excuse for not having a general liability policy in place.
Sign a lease on new office space (it’ll be required by your landlord).
Sign basically any other contract with vendors, distributors and retailers. This tends to be a boilerplate contract requirement, so keep an eye out for insurance terms.
How much you need…
$1M per occurrence and $2M aggregate is the standard starting point for any startup. Some landlords and partners may want this limit bumped up to $2/4M respectively or will request that an “umbrella policy” go on top of the underlying $1/2M, but that varies by lease.
Approximate pricing: $500–2,000 per year
Worker’s Compensation Insurance / Disability Insurance: When your startup’s foosball table stops being fun and starts being Hunger Games
Worker’s Comp covers injuries to your own employees while on the job. Similarly, disability provides a source of income to injured employees when they aren’t able to perform their job.
Claim examples…
Employees injuring themselves on the job, whether at the job or not. Think slips, falls, and spills.
A programmer suffers from carpal tunnel from all the code he’s writing.
You’ll need this when you…
Have employees on payroll. The laws differ from state to state, but usually they require coverage to protect the welfare of your team. Sometimes these will be provided automatically by the state, but whoever you buy insurance from can tell you one way or the other.
How much you need…
There are statutory minimums that vary by state, and as long as you hit those minimums, you’re all set. A good starting point is usually $1M in coverage, however, because that is the limit we see most often required by contracts and the pricing difference is typically negligible.
Approximate pricing: $300–500 per salaried employee per year
Errors and Omissions Insurance: When that line of code burns everything to the ground
Errors and Omissions Insurance (E&O) covers claims against you and your company for problems with your product/service that cause a financial loss. The problem can be professional (doctor’s malpractice) or technical (newly deployed code causing errors).
This is one of the most important insurance policies for tech startups, particularly in the B2B SaaS space. The average contract tends to be large, and a bad deploy can affect tons of users at the same time, causing the damage claims to pile up.
Claim examples…
An actual bug in your SaaS marketing/sales platform that causes users to lose money — payments aren’t processed, leads aren’t recorded, etc. — that leads to a class action lawsuit.
Your product/service doesn’t live up to your customer’s expectations; the customer alleges you haven’t honored company policies or contractual obligations.
Your customer claims you’ve violated the terms of the user agreement and sues for misrepresentation or violation of contract. Even if the allegation is borderline frivolous, you’ll still have to pay a lawyer to deal with it. These costs are covered by E&O policies.
You’ll need this when you…
Launch your product and get customers. Once your product is out in the wild, you’re exposed.
Sign a contract with customers, particularly if in the B2B space or dealing with any large corporate vendors.
How much you need…
$1M is a good starting point for E&O if you’re just launching your product. It will also be the minimum you’ll see on a contract requirement. When revenues exceed $3–5M, additional coverage should be considered.
Approximate pricing: $1,500–4,000 per year
Cyber Liability Insurance: When you leave your laptop with your customer database at that fancy noodle place
Cyber liability insurance lessons the costs from data breach incidents and the loss or theft of third party data. Losses covered can include lawsuits, forensic costs, data restoration costs, breach notification costs (this is a big one), regulatory costs, and more.
Cyber policies often include “business interruption insurance” as well. This a significant piece of coverage because it covers the company’s expenses (and the lost profits, in some situations) if your company needs to temporarily prohibit access to the product after a data breach.
Claim examples…
Your AWS databases are hacked and your users sue you for leaking information.
An employee leaves a laptop or phone in a cab that’s picked up by someone who leaks private user data.
You suspect there may have been a breach and you have to notify your users to comply with individual state laws regarding breach notification procedures.
You’re hit with a DDoS attack and you have to shut down your site for a few days, causing lost profits and expenses to build up.
You’ll need this when you…
Collect user data. The data can be as basic as a name & email address. Laws vary from state to state, but this can be enough to qualify as “personally identifiable information” (“PII”), which you can be held liable for if disclosed accidentally or maliciously.
How much you need…
E&O and Cyber will usually be paired together, so the same limits will apply until some serious growth in revenues and user base occurs.
Approximate pricing: $1,500–4,000 per year (included with the cost of E&O)
Key Person Insurance: When you are The Man™ & you die
Key Person Insurance (or “Key Man Insurance”) is a life insurance policy that pays out to the company rather than family upon insured person’s death or incapacitation.
Unlike other policies, a key person insurance policy will pay out in a lump sum once after a situation triggers coverage. This is to compensate for the hefty expenses startups incur when searching for a replacement and continuing to operate in the interim.
Claim examples…
Death or permanent incapacitation of the insured person. There are typically exclusions around alcohol/drug abuse and suicide.
You’ll need this when you…
Close a round of institutional funding. Many series A and some seed investors will require Key Person insurance.
Know that your valuation is driven by your founding team and the ability to succeed lies with that essential lineup of teammates.
How much you need…
$1M is a baseline policy, but you can go lower or higher based on the amount raised and skill set of the key person. Similar to D&O, companies that have raised $8–10M+ usually get $2M in coverage per key person.
Approximate pricing: Varies widely by product, carrier, and health/age of the key person
Employment Practices Liability Insurance: When you terminate people for no reason other than you don’t like them
Employment Practices Liability Insurance (EPLI) covers claims when it comes to Human Resources within a company: hiring, firing, disciplinary action, and more.
Claim examples…
Lawsuits for violating employment laws around race/gender/age discrimination and/or discriminatory hiring/firing practices.
Sexual harassment or hostile work environment lawsuits.
Wrongful termination lawsuits.
You’ll need this when you…
Hire! If you’re ramping up hiring, you should have EPLI in place. It’s always important, but EPLI is essential as you cross the 10 employee threshold as that is when the company becomes subject to various federal employment laws. The risk exposure increases substantially at this point.
How much you need…
The average EPL claim comes in at about $400–500K and one of the most heavily hit demographics is made up of companies with <100 employees. It’s recommend to start at $1M, but if you can swing $2M, you’ll likely be better off.
Approximate pricing: $3,000–8,000 per year
Directors and Officers Insurance: When that board member goes Minority Report on everyone and tries to undermine the whole operation
Directors and Officers Insurance (D&O) insurance covers lawsuits against, wait for it, Directors or Officers of the company related to the actions taken on behalf of the company in their capacity as, you guessed it, Directors and Officers.
Claim examples…
A board member or shareholder bringing a derivative suit against the execs when they feel they’ve violated their fiduciary duties.
Alleged misrepresentations in offering documents / prospectus.
Regulatory action against the directors and officers for securities-related issues like reporting errors, failure to file Reg D forms, etc.
You’ll need this when you…
Close a round of institutional funding. Most investors will require D&O insurance.
Actively fill board seats. D&O can actually attract board members because it shields Director(s) when they make decisions on behalf of the company.
Operate in a heavily regulated industry. Federal and state regulatory agencies have a tendency to name Directors & Officers personally when sanctioning companies.
How much you need…
$1M is a standard starting point for D&O coverage. Once you raise a round of $8M+, it’s time to think about moving up to $2M+ limits.
Approximate pricing: $5,000–10,000 per year
How to get the insurance you need
There are essentially five major events that should prompt you to look in to business insurance.
Moving into a new office
Hiring employees
Signing clients
Closing a round of funding
Your business experiences rapid growth.
Really, any business insurance broker can get you set up with the insurance you need, but having someone with specific experience with startups can go a long way to getting the right type of insurance as well as avoiding over-insuring your business.
If you don’t have insurance for your startup, I highly recommend reaching out to Founder Shield. Feel free to reference their coverage page for more details.

Baremetrics: Subscription Analytics & Insights for Stripe, Braintree, Recurly and Chargify
Baremetrics is Subscription Analytics and Insights: One click and you get hundreds of valuable metrics and business…baremetrics.com
Enjoyed this? Click the 💙 to help others find it!

Considering the legal basis for medicare and insurance exclusions for trans healthcare came from the political left, I’d say there was reason enough not to trust them.


Why Peer-to-Peer Insurance Is Coming Your Way
If ever there were an industry that was open and ready for radical disruption, it’s the insurance sector. That’s one reason why so many new, nimble insurance companies have sprung up in recent years with completely different business models. Of them, in my opinion, the peer-to-peer model is one of the most promising and, quite frankly, realistic.
Why? Because the insurance behemoths commonly sell expensive policies that are ‘cookie cutter’ in nature. But, suppose you were a concert violinist who owned a multi-million dollar Stradivarius violin. You would have to find a specialized insurance agency who could come up with a customized policy for your precious instrument. The concept of peer-to-peer insurance is that (continuing with the violin example) you find musicians and rare instrument aficionados around the world who all have the same specialized insurance needs that you do. You form a crowd-funding community based on trust and a common theme. The more people who pay an initial insurance premium, the smaller the premium. What binds all peer-to-peer set-ups together is that if you don’t make a claim during the course of a year, you receive a cash bonus. According to the peer-to-peer company Friendsurance, there have been cases recent years in which 94 percent of participants received some sort of year-end cash bonus.
The system works, according to experts, because crowd-funding ensures that people form like-minded digital communities. In China, families deal with an issue fairly exclusive to that country: child abduction. So families with small children have used a peer-to-peer agency known as TongJuBao to form a large group of policyholders who focus on that one social issue. Policyholders in most peer-to-peer insurance companies say that one of the greatest benefits is that the set-up discourages fraud and therefore premiums don’t skyrocket to help defray the cost of fraudulent claims.
Moreover, some peer-to-peer insurance policies that are set up to insure more basic things (home and auto) forgo any relationship with an established insurance company. If they make their calculations correctly, funds from the large pool of policy-holders can cover claims. That’s cutting out the middleman, which is what is truly disrupting the traditional insurance industry. In fact, the tag-line for the peer-to-peer company Lemonade, which claims to have received US$ 13 million in seed capital in 2015, is: ‘Forget Everything You Know About Insurance: We’ve redesigned insurance from the ground up to make it honest, instant, and delightful.’
It’s fair to say that the peer-to-peer insurance business model is based on trust and leveraging digital tools to safeguard its policyholders. Interestingly, the modern insurance industry has its roots in almost the same beliefs. At the height of the Industrial Revolution, manufacturing companies in the northeastern United States took advantage of a new invention: steam power. But in the early years of steam boilers (the 1850s) the technology was not without its glitches. Steam boilers were prone to exploding every now and then. So the owners of manufacturing plants were among the first crowd-funders in the modern era. They got together and formed a peer-to-peer insurance company that would protect their plants from costly steam boiler explosions. In some ways, therefore, the latest digital peer-to-peer insurance sector is a return to what insurance companies used to do: be customer-focused and, by extension, respond to the specialized needs of their policyholders.
Pankaj Kulkarni is the Head of Insurance at Infosys. For more posts by him, visit Infytalk.

Meet Jamii Africa: Microhealth Insurance Startup

Tanzanian micro-health insurance startup Jamii Africa has just raised US$750,000 seed funding for expanding across the country and into East and Central Africa.
Jamii launched in January 2015 and has built a mobile policy management platform that performs all the administration activities of an insurer, and allows users to access cheap insurance via USSD (starting at $1 per month).
Jamii plans to launch in five other African countries in 2017, and part of the plan will be to leverage their strategic partnerships with Jubilee Insurance and Vodacom Tanzania to enable mobile premium collection and a cashless facility from over 400 hospitals.
Interview with Lilian Makoi, Founder of Jamii

What inspired you to start Jamii?
Seeing the husband of my maid lose his life because they didn’t have $25 to access medical help, was a wake up call for me. I became curious to find out how big the problem was and how I could build a solution to cater for this underserved community: 50 million Tanzanians have no health insurance.

How did Jamii get to where it is today?
We started off with two people in the team, myself and Chris Rabi as my first angel investor. The team grew to 5 people while still struggling with company expenses and entrepreneurship experience. Our first break was forming a partnership with the biggest insurer in the country, Jubilee Insurance, and the biggest telecom, Vodacom Tanzania.
Our biggest break was getting into an accelerator program, the Barclays Accelerator powered by Techstars. It was there that we got to understand the value of our innovation, how to communicate it, build a financial model and test out as many strategies as we could.
This helped us go to market faster and the right way. In no time we were conversant with the startup world, started raising and grew valuable networks. This enabled us to raise our seed round $750k which now places us nicely for regional expansion.
How has the Barclays Techstars Accelerator helped shape the business?
The Barclays Accelerator equipped us with the required business design, management and growth skills we badly needed. Through the program we gained amazing connections and introductions that become investors and mentors. We were able to understand what kind of funding we needed, what percentage had to be donors, and what had to be a commercial raise. By associating with the brands Barclays Africa and Techstars, we’ve eased the journey to raising funds, and growing our partnerships.

How do you think as a startup you can get the most out of mentorship?
I strongly believe in mentors to be a vital part of a startup’s success. However, I personally believe it’s not so much about the number of mentors that you may have, but about the fit between the mentor and the company. Having a good fit allows you to make the most out of the relationship — build great partnerships, learn important lessons, and embrace opportunities.
How will you use the $750k and where do you hope to see the business by the end of 2018?
With our seed raise, we’ll take our marketing strategy to market and impact the lives of 720,000 by 2018. We have amazing partners, a great team and fantastic strategy that only needed funding to change the world!)
What advice do you have for startups who want to raise money?
Two words: great product!
This was originally published on the Techstars’ blog.
— —
Subscribe to get our new posts straight to your inbox. We publish fresh content almost daily, stay in the loop with an easy email digest sent twice a week.

Fintech Changes Insurance
Comparing health, auto, and more
Metromile

Location: San Francisco, CA
CEO: Dan Preston
Capital Raised: $14 Million
Website: metromile.com
Twitter: twitter.com/Metromile
Metromile is auto insurance meant for consumers who don’t drive often. It uses a small device that keeps track of how many miles the user drives and then charges an insurance fee accordingly. The company is seen as a threat to traditional insurance and therefore looks promising and has received over $14 million in funding.
TheZebra

Location: Austin, TX
CEO: Adam Lyons
Capital Raised: $6 Million
Website: thezebra.com
Twitter: twitter.com/TheZebraCo
TheZebra allows users to compare auto insurances discretely. It provides real-time updates, which the user can use to identify factors that influence rates. The website is essentially an insurance agent that delivers accurate, unbiased quotes.
PolicyGenius

Location: Brooklyn, NY
CEO: Jennifer Fitzgerald
Capital Raised: $750 Thousand
Website: policygenius.com
Twitter: twitter.com/PolicyGenius
PolicyGenius helps the consumer find the best kind of life, pet, and renter’s insurance. They also have a service called insurance checkup, which helps to streamline the user’s insurance. The website can quickly tell the user of problems or redundancies in their current plan.
Oscar

Location: New York, NY
CEO: Mario Schlosser
Capital Raised: $295 Million
Website: hioscar.com
Twitter: twitter.com/OscarHealth
The tag line of Oscar is that it is a new kind of health insurance company. The Peter Thiel backed company, strives to make complicated and confusing processes easy and transparent. It uses technology where traditional companies do not. It also offers benefits like free checkups and free doctor phone calls.
CoverHound

Location: San Francisco, CA
CEO: Keith Moore
Capital Raised: $23.4 Million
Website: coverhound.com
Twitter: twitter.com/CoverHound
CoverHound is an auto insurance platform that strives to keep the consumer in control. It finds personalized quotes while also keeping the information safe. This type of “Kayak” for auto insurance benefits consumers since they can go to one website to see many different quotes to find the best price.
Abaris

Location: Philadelphia, PA
CEO: Matt Carey
Capital Raised: $450,000
Website: myabaris.com
Twitter: twitter.com/MyAbaris
Abaris is a startup based on providing a steady income for retirees. The website determines the users retirement needs and then provides quotes from insurance companies with the facts and not a sales pitch.
Trov

Location: Danville, CA
CEO: Scott Walchek
Capital Raised: $13.3 Million
Website: trov.com
Twitter: twitter.com/mytrov
Trov allow users to track and itemize their possessions. Think of it as like a “Mint for your stuff”. Their platform tracks items’ values and gets quotes for each. Trov provides a wealth of information that the user has access to via mobile devices.
SimplyInsured


SimplyInsured allows small businesses to get simple quotes on insurance. It estimates the net costs when purchasing health insurance. Users can then get coverage based on their unique needs. The company also handles all the necessary paperwork to quickly implement a new plan.
California Fintech Network is a non-profit trade organization for professionals, founders, executives, and investors that work in financial technology. Find more detailed research at www.CaliforniaFintech.org
California Fintech Network is a private network of professionals, founders, executives, and investors that work in financial technology. Find more detailed research at www.californiafintech.net


Helping Consumerize Health Insurance
Sally Poblete, Founder & CEO of Wellthie, chats about her mission, how the Affordable Care Act has given the insurance industry an opportunity for disruption and keeping a positive mindset through the process.
(Subscribe: YT, Soundcloud, iTunes)
GUEST: Sally Poblete, Wellthie
HOST: Unity Stoakes, StartUp Health
LOCATION: Wearable Tech + Digital Health Conference, New York, NY
IN THIS EPISODE:
The Wellthie Mission
Expanding Innovation Into The Insurance Industry
Ingredients Needed to Make A Change
Show Notes and Key Takeaways (Access the full transcript here)
The Wellthie Mission
[01:21] Sally Poblete: I’m a former health insurance executive from Anthem. Also a licensed insurance broker and despite my industry expertise like most people out there I found the process of choosing and buying insurance to be quite cumbersome.
[01:36] Sally: I set out to make this process using technology simple design and a focus on education to be much more simple and engaging for businesses and individuals. What we offer is a modern and smart marketplace whereby businesses and individuals with the help of their broker can find the most affordable insurance for them. We license this technology to insurance carriers and brokers who are eager to have engaging and effective e-commerce marketplaces.
Expanding Innovation Into The Insurance Industry
[02:32] Unity Stoakes: Why are we seeing so much innovation today specifically in the insurance industry? It seems like there’s a big need but what’s going on today? What are the conditions and why is it so needed?
[02:47] Sally: Insurances are a really interesting industry. First of all, it’s gigantic. There are almost a trillion dollars in premium in the health sector alone. Second when you think about insurance you often think about managing risk and regulation. Those two things are not at all synonymous with innovation and disruption. Third, it’s a very old Industry. It’s at among the fortune 500 companies who are insurance. In the insurance industry the average age is 95 years old.
[03:24] Sally: This old huge and what we believe is you know largely unaddressed in terms of technological innovation is ripe for lots of creativity simplicity and innovation today.
The Aha Moment: Starting Wellthie
[04:08] Sally: The Affordable Care Act as you know has broad significant market expansion to people buying insurance and needing insurance because they are required to do so by the Affordable Care Act. Secondly, the Affordable Care Act has brought more transparency in standardization in the way that insurance prices are determined where previously that was pretty opaque and you know kind of in a black box. The third is that the industry has gone retail and to be a successful retail one must engage the end consumer and it’s no longer sufficient to have a strong brand as an insurance carrier to also be a successful retailer.
[04:52] Sally: Last but certainly not least we are in the age of the digital consumer where we all are used to seamless 24–7 convenient experiences in all aspects of our lives and so expect that from purchasing insurance as well. Yet, we rely on and benefit from the help of experts who help make this very big important purchase a confident one. So, that’s exactly what we’re doing. Wellthie’s mission to simplify and modernize the process but also help the experts in the form of brokers and other intermediaries support their customers
Ingredients Needed to Make A Change
[05:38] Unity: ..At the heart of this challenge here is we’ve got this legacy industry as you said that’s been around for a hundred years and longer. It’s very complicated in the entire way they’ve been selling, is completely changing. Who do you think is going to crack this code? Obviously, Wellthie is focusing on it but what are the ingredients needed to be able to really simplify this very complex business?
[06:23] Sally: We are industry experts who have come out of this complicated, nuanced industry and innovating from essentially within and partnering with those incumbents to help Innovate. We think that that domain expertise coupled with the rest of our team’s technology and innovation expertise are the key ingredients to making a change. Our mission is in our team’s passion for doing this, is so strong, but at the same time, we have a healthy respect for the regulation in the nuance frankly. The differences in the markets and the distribution channels and the products that often are overlooked by pure tech companies who may not realize just how entrenched and how complicated the existing system is. But because we understand that we have a good grounding in the opportunities to pick first and where to innovate next.
A Collaborative Approach to Change
[07:27] Unity: So it sounds like your strategy is more of a collaborative, focus on collaboration with industry from the beginning as opposed to completely going around like many technology companies sort of do in healthcare?
[07:42] Sally: Yeah I think so. I think that collaborative approach has really been a key to our success. We count today in terms of our customer’s insurance companies who have leveraged our technology and are now leading in terms of their own innovation, and as well as working with brokers small businesses and individuals. So I think that that’s a great way to put it and really proud of the way that we’ve approached the industry today.
Advice for the New Entrepreneur
[09:40] Sally: I used to think I had to have the perfect idea or all of the resources or things in place in order to start a company and what I’ve learned through the journey is that so much has been certainly having a focus and having a mission is very important but so much of how we’ve approached the market has been in response to the feedback from our customers and the experiences we’ve had. So, it’s been more iterative than having everything right from the get-go.
[10:11] Sally: So I’d say to the aspiring entrepreneurs out there to take the plunge. To go out there and take the first step and I think there’s no substitute to actually hearing and listening to market feedback to tweak and perfect that and get that product market fit.
[10:33] Sally: I think the other thing more so I’d say the things that I try to share with my own children is building resilience and practicing resilience every day because the constant onslaught of challenges and change and rejection and lots and lots of other difficulties on the road to entrepreneurship require a soft healthy dose of resilience and frankly gratitude for the accomplishments that we’ve got me to date.
Sally, on Keeping a Positive Mindset
[11:12] Unity: One of the big challenges as you alluded to all these ups and downs as an entrepreneur. What do you do personally to keep a positive mindset or maybe hobbies that you do to have fun and sort of get through the challenging times of your journey?
[11:32] Sally: Yeah. Those ups and downs really are a part of life. I’d say I’m proud to have two inspiring daughters and I think them and my husband are what balances me every day and when I get home and know that they’re happy and healthy and that the home life is good. That really provides good perspective that the ups and downs of entrepreneurship like parenthood are just that and there’re more highs than there are low so life is good.
Resources, Websites and Tools Mentioned:
[00:04] StartUp Health NOW!
[00:04] Wearable Tech and Digital Health Conference in New York City
[00:04] Wellthie
[01:17] Anthem Insurance
[01:17] Insurance Broker
[02:08] Cloud Storage
[02:08] Saas
[02:12] White Label
[02:12] E-commerce
[02:47] Fortune 500 Companies
[04:02] The Affordable Care Act
Related and Recommended StartUp Health NOW! Episodes:
Solutions for Behavior Change in Corporate Wellness — Chris Cutter, LifeDojo: NOW! #85
Pioneering Behavioral Health Solutions — Eve Phillips, Empower Interactive: NOW #83
Harnessing Information Technology for a Common Objective — Manu Kodiyan, Althea Health: NOW! #81
Changing the Face of Cancer — Jasvir Zonobi, Kuveda: NOW! #77
The Evolution of an Entrepreneur — Jean Anne Booth, UnaliWear: NOW! #67

The facts of life (insurance)
Compare and contrast…
How not to try and sell life insurance

Untargeted
Advertising
Emotional blackmail
Trying to get people to face up to their own mortality (in defiance of the present bias)
Euphemistic language (it’s not life insurance, it’s death insurance!)
The same old unreconstructed 25 year term product that’s been around for 300 years
A purchase process that takes months, reams of paperwork and a medical
How to get people to buy life insurance

Not calling it life insurance
Unbundling it down into buyable chunks
Tying it to a specific use-case
Using plain(ish) language
Making it a one-click purchase in an app
Magnificently cynical exploitation of people’s fear of flying (in defiance of data)

7 Investors And Startup CEOs Sound Off On Insurance Tech’s Present And Future

Growing momentum in insurance technology was a major theme at this year’s Future of Fintech Conference. See what speakers from Lemonade, AmFam, Hiscox, NEA and others had to say.
At last week’s CB Insights Future of Fintech Conference, the growing momentum of insurance technology as well as corporate venturing within the insurance sector became major themes among panel speakers including executives and investors from Oscar, Lemonade, American Family Ventures, NEA, and Hiscox among others.
In Q1’16, deal activity to insurance tech startups hit a new all-time high at 47 deals totaling $650M in total investment as the landscape expands to startups across life, small commercial, renter’s, and other categories.
Below are 10 perspectives on the insurance tech industry from last week’s conference on a variety of topics including cyberinsurance, a possible corporate VC shakeout, Oscar’s quirky subway ads, and much more.
The commentary
Will there be an eventual corporate VC shakeout in insurance?

Dan Reed, Managing Director, American Family Ventures
I think one of the things that’s unique to corporate VC is that you’re subject to leadership changes in the organization because you have a single funder and it’s not a traditional LP-type model. So I think one of the main reasons why some corporate VCs will cease operations is the strategy and the leadership of their companies will change.
The other thing that I think is important for the success of a CVC is that they need to make sure they align every aspect of their process to market standards — that has to do with the speed of execution, it has to do with the diligence process and who you need to get involved with and then what type of contractual expectations you have beyond what the financial investor would expect.
Will there be a major startup winner in the SMB insurance space?

Kevin Kerridge, EVP, Small Business Insurance, Hiscox
I remember when I came here in 2009 to scout the opportunity and I went back to London and said, I must be missing something because small business insurance is so far behind everything else in life in the US and what am I missing? And the big conclusion that we came to was that it’s just all about channel conflict. All the big incumbent insurers have got so many billions of dollars of premium tied up in traditional agents that for one of them to actually break ranks and say we’re launching an online direct-to-consumer business would be a huge deal.
So I think that’s the thing that’s holding it back at the moment. We are seeing some signs — Berkshire Hathaway launched a business this year, direct-to-consumer. We’re seeing a lot of activity in the online agent space. But what we really hope for at Hiscox is one of the really big small commercial brands to start going for small commercial in a big way because all those marketing dollars they spend will benefit brands like us because it will help change consumer behavior to actually go to the web than traditional channels.
What are the root causes of why insurance is broken?

Daniel Schreiber, CEO, Lemonade
To us, there are two structural issues in insurance today and that’s why Lemonade is rebuilding itself as an insurance carrier because we don’t think you can simply parachute down some kind of technological solution on existing infrastructure when the problems are structural.
The first is the legacy. In the US, almost 10% of the Fortune 500 are insurance companies, the average age is 95 years old. Nothing wrong with that but what you’re talking about is a corporate structure that is really the byproduct of the Industrial Revolution. These are companies that were best practices, no doubt, at the time of their establishment but those best practices are no longer true today in the era of the sharing economy and the Internet. And it’s incredibly difficult to reinvent yourself when seas change. So State Farm has 18,000 brokers — what do you do? How do you reinvent yourself as a direct-to-consumer when you have that albatross around your neck.
The second is more subtle and insidious and that is the business model. So at the risk of being a little provocative, insurance makes money by denying claims. There is a profound conflict of interest at the very core of the insurance business model. So if I’m the insurance company and you’re making a claim, every dollar that I pay you is a dollar less to my bottom line. And I think that is something that spirals. So I have a profound financial incentive not to pay you, you sense that, which then justifies me treating you as a criminal putting heavy-handed claims processes in place, which pisses you off and makes you behave even worse and you get this spiral where people don’t like insurance, don’t trust it, and most American say they do not believe the insurance company will pay them when the day comes.
Will we see the death of the insurance agent?

Kevin Kerridge, EVP, Small Business Insurance, Hiscox
There’s a lot of talk about insurance agents going the way of the dodo. That ain’t happening. Insurance agents are here for the long-term. It’s more about what those agents look like and how they will be enabled by technology.
On insurance tech investing opportunities

Joe Lonsdale, Founder Partner, 8VC
Insurance is also a really interesting area. I think a lot of the big insurance companies here are aware that they could be using data to do their job a lot better, whether it’s life insurance or health insurance. Health insurance is interesting because it’s very regulated so you can’t use data to do better stuff with individuals but you can with groups and you also can for cutting your costs. I think there’s a ton more to do in health insurance, it’s a trillion-dollar market. I am very bullish on Oscar, I think it’s going to be very big but hopefully there’s more stuff you see there that transforms it.
I think in P&C, that’s obviously a very data-driven area. One of the best run insurers there is Ace-Chubb that combined; they have lower loss-ratios than other companies and I think they’re a very well-run company, but there’s still a ton of data they could be using that they’re not. So you still have these very big insurance companies that are not really up-to-date on the latest datasets and data platforms. There’s lots of room for disruption there. It’s become an area that a lot of people in Silicon Valley are focusing on so you should expect to see a lot more new insurance companies as well as technologies.
Why did you take the full-stack approach when starting Oscar?

Mario Schlosser, CEO, Oscar
In the very early design slides for Oscar, we actually said, oh we should be an asset-light insurance company. So originally the idea was we want to be on our own paper meaning we want to have our own capital, our own balance sheet and so on to be able to make decisions more quickly and decide what we want to reimburse and pay for and so on, but the idea was let’s get the best APIs, let’s get the best platforms to connect to, etc.
We thought that’s how you can build an insurance company early on. And that’s decidedly not the case. There’s really two reasons for it. Reason 1 is when you go and work with vendors that attach themselves to payers in the industry, whether it’s a pharmacy benefits manager that negotiates drug prices for you, whether it’s a network of physicians, whether it is a utilization management vendor, you wouldn’t expect these guys to be particularly technical. We met one vendor very early on, in 2013, and we said bring your technology guys, we want to talk about how to tap into your systems and get a real-time data exchange between your systems and our systems. We go into the room and the two guys who are the tech guys are the guy who plugs in the network cables and the guy who installs Microsoft Office on your PC and they both fell asleep during the meeting.
The second was that healthcare vendors don’t live in environments where they get beaten down on their error rates. Healthcare tends to have a 10 to 15 percent error rate, where claims are wrongly coded, where transmissions get dropped in ways that are very core to the way the business works and nobody seems to really care all that much because you and I as the end users are not the end customers.
So that’s why we said we got to be full-stack, we got to rebuild the systems from the ground up so that we now have our own claims system, our own processes around anything from utilization management to clinical research to member services.
On the plethora of touch points in health insurance vs. other personal lines

Mario Schlosser, CEO, Oscar
The big difference between any other insurance vertical and health is the number of interaction points you have. In auto insurance, in home insurance, you don’t crash your car all the time, your auto insurer doesn’t pay for your car checkup, there’s no preventative care for cars. These are all interaction points we have in health. Health insurance is worrying more than just when you get sick. We are very economically aligned with a member, if we can keep you healthy, we will make you money. The average member has four doctor visits a year, eight prescription drug refills a year and so on so you have these interaction points and that’s a very important difference.
On Oscar’s quirky subway ads

Mario Schlosser, CEO, Oscar
This was the simple insight. We started running search ads and banner ads and we noticed we didn’t get members out of it. And buying something as heavy as insurance, you do want to have an idea of what this company is. So we thought, is there a way to make us look more solid? Subway ads are the second biggest channel that people describe as the reason why they joined Oscar in NY. The first is word-of-mouth. But it doesn’t work in other markets. (In other markets like NJ), radio works better. In particular, DJ reads, where the DJ talks a little about the story. In NY, the subway is very egalitarian. Hedge fund managers and people building your furniture alike ride the subway and radio might be a bit more like that in other places.
On investing in cyberinsurance

Ravi Viswanathan, General Partner, New Enterprise Associates
(We’ve invested) in company called Cyence. It’s a team out of Informatica that started the company a few years ago and the pain point they found is that boards, this is being elevated to board-level conversations, didn’t really know the cyber threats. A lot of the boards are paralyzed and don’t know how to deal with that threat and so there’s a whole industry that’s emerged and this is really insuring for cyber. And there’s a whole ecosystem they’ve developed with carriers and reinsurers and it’s really taking off in terms of being able to bound the threat, insure against it, monitor it, there’s a whole data layer that’s getting established. It’s still in its infancy as a market, but I think it’s a market that will evolve significantly.
On enabling trends in insurance tech

Patricia Kemp, General Partner, Oak HC/FT
Number one is that there’s not a lack of capital. The insurance carriers have capital. There’s an excess of capital so making good use of the capital and allowing data and cloud-based services to help deploy that capital, they want to sell more insurance. Number two, most people would indicate that there’s going to be an employment issue in insurance. That people aren’t going into insurance so they’re losing 500,000 people to retirement over the next 3–5 years so they are looking for cloud-based solutions to lower the cost structure and replace human labor with a cloud-based service so they’re actively looking, most would say.
To get the full report from 2016’s Future of Fintech conference, click here: http://cbi.vc/2a3xWFL


Laughter Is the Best Medicine: How Humor Changed Health Insurance
Leo Burnett helps UnitedHealthcare find its comedic side and stand out in a sea of sameness
Just two years ago, health insurance advertising was all the same: vignettes of happy, demographically assorted people. Puppies. Babies. Soothing voiceover vaguely promising “wellness.” Xylophones. Interchangeable brand logo at the end. According to iSpot, the average engagement score of the health insurance category in January of 2015 was a sorry 4.2 out of a possible 10. People didn’t like health insurance companies, and they definitely didn’t trust them.
So how did humor change that? Well, about three years ago, a few really smart folks at UnitedHealthcare had come knocking on Leo Burnett’s door. They knew they needed to do something different. They wanted a brand campaign that would stand out in the sea of health insurance sameness. They figured if they could get people to like and trust UnitedHealthcare, then they’d be more effective at helping their members get and stay healthy. And that wouldn’t just be good for people — it’d be good for business.
I’d like to say that we at Leo Burnett said to UnitedHealthcare at that point, “Hey — let’s do something funny because laughter has proven health benefits!” But we didn’t. Like all great collaborations, there were plenty of false starts, dead ends, breakthroughs, disagreements, nail-biting, angels singing, and messy meetings. But after some smart consumer insights, a few creative a-has, a little bit of testing, a lot of client courage and a tight partnership, we created a campaign with UnitedHealthcare called “Ways In.”
Mark Twain once said, “Humor is the good-natured side of a truth.” And the good-natured truth Leo Burnett mined is that there are a lot of ways people get into in the complex health-care system. Better yet, there’s a hilariously specific official medical code for each way in. From being bitten by an orca (W56.21XA) to being injured while knitting or crocheting (Y93.D1) to getting a paper cut (W26.2). (By the way, UnitedHealthcare didn’t make those codes up. There are more than 76,000 of these ICD-10 codes, and they’re used by hospitals, doctor’s offices, governments and insurance companies around the world to classify ailments.)
We told funny stories of how those codes might have gotten onto peoples’ medical records. Then we showed how UnitedHealthcare could help by making the medical system less costly, less confusing, less irritating and a whole lot more human.
The very first spot told the story of a couple making dinner in their kitchen. “Their song” comes on the radio, and it happens to be “Time of My Life” from the movie “Dirty Dancing.” One missed lift, one broken dining room table, one medical code (Y93.49) and one virtual doctor visit later, and UnitedHealthcare had rocketed to the top of the iSpot engagement charts, with a consumer rating of 9.8 out of a possible 10.
That one spot single-handedly raised the category average from 4.2 to 4.5. And people like to share funny videos. So, even though “Our Song” only ran in North America, it was the most shared spot in the world for three weeks running.

But the last thing any brand wants is a one-hit wonder. Luckily, people like funny. Seven of the spots Leo Burnett has created for UnitedHealthcare (so far) have also beaten the iSpot average. Most by a lot. “Pool Vault” — the story of a man with a pool-cleaning pole and a dream of Olympic glory — got a 9.1. “Low Jump” — where a mom gets carried away by her basketball moves — got an 8.8. And in a category that doesn’t get a lot of positive feedback, we kinda nailed that, too. “Lamp Post,” a 15-second spot about a guy who’s too busy texting to see what’s about to put him in the health care system (hint: it isn’t a lamp post), got 99% positive social sentiment. Oh, and a 6.7 on the engagement scale — still way above average for the category.
Maybe it’s not surprising that humor was so key in changing the category — laughter really does have proven health benefits. It reduces stress, anxiety and depression. It can also strengthen your immune system and diminish pain.
And given that imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, it’s also not surprising that other national health insurers are also trying their hand at humor, like Cigna’s “TV Doctors” and Humana’s “Great Things.”
But at least according to iSpot, none have done so nearly as well as UnitedHealthcare and Leo Burnett.
Jeanie Caggiano is executive vice president, executive creative director and business lead on UnitedHealthcare at Leo Burnett USA.
Originally published at leoburnett.com.


An alternative approach for insurance providers
In an environment where consumers are mainly driven by price and have easy access to compare the cost of policies, how does an insurance provider retain customers without a race to the bottom?
This question came to mind recently when I needed to renew a policy, just as this Econsultancy post came out.
The article looks at the efforts Direct Line Group are making to position themselves differently in a market typically focussed on price. Direct Line, who do not sell through price comparison sites, are currently running an extensive marketing campaign to highlight the ‘value’ of their products, rather than the ‘price’.

Assuming it is cheaper to retain customers than to attract new ones, how does a company differentiate itself enough to retain customers at renewal?
For the majority of people there is no need to communicate with their insurance companies on a regular basis. Assuming they do not have to make a claim for motor, home, pet or life insurance, policies are paid and nothing happens. With quick and easy access to price comparison websites and no relationship with your insurer, of course you are going to move to a more competitive provider at renewal.
Telematics insurers are in the fortunate position of being able to communicate with their customers on a regular basis. Some insurers vary the premium mid-term based on the driving patterns and behaviours of their customers, meaning there are opportunities for regular conversations with policy holders. This has led to higher retention rates for some telematics insurers above those of standard providers.
Insurers could use regular dialogue to encourage referrals and recommendations.
For most types of insurance, it is unlikely that everyone will be offered the same premiums. I have friends and family that have minor driving convictions, that travel a lot for work or live in a different postcode etc… All of these factors will affect their risk profile and therefore the cost of their policies. There is little point in my recommending an insurer to them based on price, when they will not get the same premium as I do.
But I would be able to recommend my insurer based on service and the narrative of the company. With all the data the insurance providers hold about me, they should be able to communicate a story which has a relevance to me, even when cross-selling services.
For instance, things like name, age, address, occupation, the car I drive, whether I drive abroad, whether I’m married, if I have children (and their ages) etc… are all relatively standard questions asked across home, motor and life insurance.
With this data an insurer could provide targeted messages to me as a customer to highlight the benefits of the insurance I have, for example a simple email once a quarter with a message like:
“We helped a married couple in Hampshire repair their damaged home after they were flooded. We also made sure their children didn’t miss a day of school. Watch this 90 second video with their recommendations on how to protect all your treasured memories.”
During the term of the policy, the messages could vary from making us feel comfortable and reassured to being concerned and more aware of negative outcomes. This could involve changing the message from “Here is how we can help you if things go wrong” to “How will your children cope if this happens?” for example. In doing so the organisation will not only reinforce my appreciation for their policies I have purchased and understand where it would be beneficial to buy new polices from them, but also go some way to maintaining a positive, personal experience of the company as a whole.
In a digital world where we are all facing an increasing lack of human interaction, it could be tactics like this that really help build trust and a connection with a provider, a clear way to stand out from the competition and encourage retention and recommendations.
Getting the message out.
We often see companies using retargeting methods to sell new things to us, but I’m not sure I’ve ever seen a retargeting marketing approach used as part of a retention plan.
With the vast amount of data insurance companies hold about me, profiling me (using Acorn or similar) should be very easy and accurate. This should allow for targeted social media adverts, backed up with e-mail and direct mail campaigns that reiterate the positive message of the value of the products they provide, not the price.
These messages are more shareable amongst my peers than one of price. The majority of my social circle are married, have school aged kids, live in the same area as me and are generally at the same stage of life as I am. Having a story we could all relate to, such as the family who got their home back after a flood, makes for easily shareable content.
And we all know the value of a positive referral.


Cyber-Insurance: The Most Important Type of Insurance in 2017
Read the full story here.
The worldwide cybersecurity market is defined by market sizing estimates that range from $77 billion in 2015 to $170 billion by 2020. Nonetheless, even at such a scale, cybersecurity service providers are not able to tame imaginative and aggressive pool of talented hackers, exposing vast amount of private data to the public or using it for personal financial gain.
While part of an entrepreneurial community works on eliminating/preventing a threat using advanced technologies, another part created an industry to address hardships organizations experience as a result of a successful cyberattack. Both elements of the ecosystem are equally important. However, since there is little to no chance of completely eliminating the threat, it’s vitally important to be able to deal with consequences of a cyber-disaster should one occur.
Find out more here.
In response to increasing connectivity across industries and accelerated accumulation of sensitive data in the global Web and on private servers, the global cyber-insurance market is estimated to grow to $5 billion in annual premiums by 2018 and at least $7.5 billion by the end of the decade.
Paul Delbridge, Partner at PwC, emphasized that, “Sustaining credibility in the cyber-risk market is crucial when looking to become a leader in this fast growing market. If this trust is compromised, and with innovative competitors knocking on the door, it would be extremely difficult to restore brand reputation.”
Indeed, businesses across industries recognize the importance of cyber-insurance in today’s increasingly complex and high-risk digital landscape — the cost of cybercrime in the US alone is estimated to be at approximately $100 billion annually. As reported by the WSJ, in 2015, the British insurance company Lloyd’s estimated that cyberattacks cost businesses as much as $400 billion a year, which includes direct damage plus post-attack disruption to the normal course of business. Some vendor and media forecasts over the past year put the cybercrime figure as high as $500 billion and more.
The scale of the problem has direct implications on business sustainability and top executives do understand the threat: 71% of insurance CEOs, 79% of banking CEOs (the highest of any sector) and 61% of business leaders across all industries see cyberattacks as a threat to growth, ranking it higher than shifts in consumer behavior the speed of technological change and supply chain disruption. Being at the forefront of both cybercrimes and funds poured into cybersecurity, four banking industry giants — JPMorgan Chase & Co. ($500 million), Bank of America ($400 million), Citigroup ($300 million) and Wells Fargo ($250 million) — are ready to collectively spend $1.5 billion on cybersecurity annually.
To address the problem, carriers develop insurance products to capitalize on the opportunity. The London insurance market — the largest in the world — is predicting a surge in companies and individuals taking out policies against cyberattacks in 2017 after a 50% rise this year, the Financial Times reports. The edition states that the total cyber-insurance written premium around the world is estimated at $2.5 billion, and that could reach $20 billion by 2025.
Regardless of the value and increasing importance of cyber-insurance products, insurance industry representatives admit that cyber-insurance capacity is small compared to insurance markets covering other property and casualty risks. Moreover, some surveys suggest that a number of major gaps exist between the cyber-insurance market and cybersecurity professionals: one problem is the terminology different professionals use — particularly when discussing the concept of ‘risk’. Security experts see the term as meaning vulnerabilities to a security system, while insurers interpret it as the monetary cost of a breach.
Continue reading here.

SinglePayer is all the medical places remain in place and instead of billing the insurance corporations, they bill a National Health Office. A single agency pays, no multiple invoices, no double billing, none of that. The insurance corporations become the record keepers, not the payers. Also, all “premiums” in the form of a general tax from incomes are paid directly into a large insurance fund. No separate insurances, everyone has the same insurance group 319 million people is a large risk pool.
UniversalCare is everyone is covered. If you go into an ER with a broken leg, you get treated. Period, no insurance preauth, no copays, none of that. If you are in America and you get injured or sick, you get treatment.
That’s how I define it.
Haters and trolls: Not going to engage with anyone else’s comments about how I got it wrong. Not interested. Go make your own argument in your own space and don’t coattail me.

Yup. And health insurance which LOTS of money will take care of. Like lots and lots, a firehose of money. A YUUUUGE firehose of money. Just for insurance. If you need health CARE, that’s Another firehose of money.
100 Letters to Senator Hillary Clinton
From the nomination to the 2016 election, there are 100 days. I intend to write one letter each day to Hillary Clinton…medium.com
It’s my first question when I read those blocs of “follow your bliss” or nomad snapchats, “What are you doing for health care.”
I suppose if you live in Australia or Spain, France, Sweden, Denmark well, by all means you are covered. In America, you’re rich or a big liar. Or young, healthy and reckless.

A Private Unemployment Insurance Question of the Day
Because federal unemployment benefits aren’t always enough.
Up in the Air
A lot of us are entitled to federal unemployment benefits should we lose our jobs. (A lot of us aren’t, but that’s another post for another time.) Those of us who do receive unemployment checks often learn that they aren’t enough to cover expenses—but hey, it’s 2016, all you need to do is buy a little supplementary insurance from a private insurer and you’re good to go!
Let’s Buy Insurance to Cover the Deductible on Our Health Insurance
For every problem, there’s a product.medium.com
So now we have IncomeAssure, a private unemployment insurer. The New York Times’ Ron Lieber explains how it works:
Let’s say you live in New York and earn $100,000 annually. The highest possible weekly unemployment check is $425. But your weekly pretax salary is $1,923. Half of that is $961.50. So if you signed up for the maximum benefit from IncomeAssure and then lost your job, you would receive a weekly check for $536.50, which is the difference between $425 and $961.50.
Or, as IncomeAssure puts it:
With IncomeAssure, if you are laid off, you will receive 50% of your former salary, replaced through a combination of state unemployment benefits and our supplemental benefits, instead of the smaller amount your state would replace alone.
Once you start poking around IncomeAssure’s website like I did, you’ll learn that they really mean “you will receive up to 50 percent of your former salary;” as with most insurers, you have the option to request a smaller salary percentage in exchange for a smaller premium.
Are there catches? Of course there are:
You can’t collect unemployment benefits if you lose your job less than six months after signing up for IncomeAssure. (Lieber and IncomeAssure both note that in this case the company will refund any insurance premiums paid, so that’s a plus.)
You must wait two weeks after your job loss before collecting benefits from IncomeAssure.
IncomeAssure only provides 24 weeks of benefits.
So let’s answer the big question: how much is this going to cost you? IncomeAssure offers a semi-opaque answer:
On average, premiums are less than 1% of gross annual salary (trailing 12 month salary, bonus and commission) and depend on your work state, industry, salary and the selected coverage. For example, if you make $75,000 per year, your policy could cost less than $50 per month.
I tried to figure out how much IncomeAssure would cost me, per month, and I learned that I wasn’t eligible for the program:

Technically, I would not be qualified for the policy at all, since IncomeAssure does not accept people who make their income as 1099 independent contractors. But in the parallel universe where I’m a W2 employee at a media company making $60K a year, I’m still unable to apply for IncomeAssure.
So. The question of the day: would you sign up for a private unemployment insurer like IncomeAssure? Are you even eligible? (I’d love to see what kinds of quotes you get, even though I know that those “get a quote” buttons usually mean “give us your contact information so we can call and email you with sales pitches.”)
Also: if you are eligible for federal unemployment benefits, do you already have a plan for making up the gap between benefits and expenses should something happen to your job(s)? This is one of the reasons why I toss 10 percent of every paycheck into my savings account and count the days until I have three months of living expenses saved—that, and the whole “I won’t be eligible for any unemployment benefits at all” thing.

Introducing Lockton Affinity: An exciting new path for our Insurance Program
by Scott Raker, Director of Insurance at Fractured Atlas
Tree Lined Path by Martin Pettitt
The Fractured Atlas Insurance Program, which helps artists across the country find property and casualty insurance, is entering an exciting new partnership to further our mission of making insurance affordable and accessible to all artists. As of January 2017, we will be partnering with Lockton Affinity, an organization that brings a record of creating and servicing best-in-class insurance programs for groups in many different fields. Through this collaboration with Fractured Atlas, they will now do the same for the arts.
The new program administration through Lockton Affinity will come with several advantages. Here are just a few of the benefits you can expect to see in the coming months:
Expanded Features: A fully revamped website exclusive to Fractured Atlas members.
Ease of Use: A more streamlined application submission process for accessible and affordable quotes.
Best-in-class Service: A knowledgeable team of representatives dedicated to servicing our members’ needs.
From advice on applications to providing necessary certificates and endorsements for active policies, the team available through Lockton Affinity will be there for artist inquiries across disciplines and types of property and casualty insurance.
For individual members with active policies that were bound through our relationship with Maury, Donnelly, and Parr, we will follow up with you directly regarding the options available to ensure you receive the support and service you need.
Fractured Atlas continues to look for practical solutions that break down barriers to artists. With this new relationship, our Insurance Program will enable artists nationwide to create without restraint. We’re excited to better service your needs with our updated program.

Fractured Atlas is a nonprofit technology organization that helps artists with the business side of their creative work. To find our more about Fractured Atlas, or get involved, visit us here.

The Best Camera Insurance Plans for Freelancers
8
As a freelance shooter, you have probably invested thousands of dollars into your camera equipment. Since anything is possible during a production, it’s a good idea to protect that investment by insuring it. While there are tons of insurance providers, here are the ones that offer worldwide coverage and the best deals.
A number of photographer or videographer freelance organizations offer insurance as part of their membership benefits:
American Photographic Artists
Membership to the APA can cost as little as $125 for access to their insurance plans. However, for equipment coverage only, the annual premium starts at $400 for members and $500 for non-members. The members plan is worldwide and covers up to $31,000 for theft, mysterious disappearance, fire, vandalism, and accidental breakage.
Professional Photographers of America
With their Professional Active membership, which costs $323 per year, you can get equipment insurance without a premium cost. The Photo Care insurance plan covers up to $15,000 for loss due to fire, theft, and equipment breakage with deductibles at $250 for the first loss to $750 for the third. They also offer memberships to international photographers and videographers.
American Society of Media Photographers
While they don’t offer equipment specific insurance, members of the ASMP can get comprehensive insurance that starts at $325 per year. However, membership dues range from $140 to $335 per year and may require sponsorship to join.

Some companies offer equipment insurance through brokers or as comprehensive plans for small businesses:
TCP Insurance
Their General Liability and Camera Equipment Insurance policies start at $500 per year, but they don’t give exact quotes. Their coverage is worldwide and includes theft and accidental breakage at replacement cost. They also offer short-term rental insurance.
Hiscox
In order to cover equipment damage with Hiscox, you have to purchase their business owner insurance policy. This policy combines general liability insurance with property insurance and may cost upwards of $500 per year.
Insureon
Insureon’s property insurance plan is customizable, depending on factors such as whether you’re traveling or if you need your equipment to be replace at full value. Their property insurance covers theft and fire damage and sometimes risks, such as natural disasters, particular to where you’re working.

If these options don’t work for you, homeowners insurance will sometimes include property, such as camera equipment. Small business insurance plans, which usually includes liability and property, can also cover your equipment for you. Depending on the value of what you own and where you live, be aware that the above plans could vary.
What insurers have you used to protect your equipment?

How Much The Self-Driving Version Of Your Car Will Save On Insurance (In 1 Graph)

(Ferenstein Wire) — Self-driving cars will save the average driver about $1,000 annually, or cost $250 a year total, according to estimates from auto insurance startup, Metromile.
Robotic self-driving cars have a near perfect driving record; thus far, when self-driving cars do get into accidents, it’s because humans were responsible. Since Google began to release details about self-driving car accidents, reports from the Wall Street Journal, the RAND Corporation, and KPMG have all predicted a dramatic shrinking in the auto insurance industry.
So, to put this speculation into a concrete figure that most people would care about, the Ferenstein Wire asked the actuaries at insurance startup Metromile to take evidence from Google’s detailed accident report and construct their own pricing model for self-driving cars.
Metromile recently partnered with Uber to provide its drivers a special insurance deal. Since Uber is on record for wanting to replace its fleet with self-driving cars, Metromile will likely be among the first companies that must come up with pricing models at scale.
Model Details
The insurance model is based on a 20-year-old single female in the San Francisco bay Area, driving 12,000 miles/year. Most of the cost savings from self-driving cars come from the near elimination of accidental collisions (a 90% reduction).
So, why do we still need insurance if so few cars get into accidents?
The model estimates that some cars may be vandalized or broken into, which makes up much of the yearly insurance cost for autonomous vehicles. In the future, self-driving cars could just park themselves in a secure garage at night rather than waiting around while their owner sleeps or goes grocery shopping — making the price even cheaper.
To give readers some back-of-the-napkin estimates about how this might change the value of a car, here’s an example. Over the lifetime of the car, assuming about $6,000 in total savings over 5 years, a self-driving Tesla model III could be cheaper than a human-powered BMW 2 Series (~$36,000 vs. $37,000 for the BMW in total costs for each car).
“I would anticipate that in the short and medium term, claims are likely to gradually go down as crashes become less common,” says James Anderson, a behavior scientist at the Rand Corporation, who recently wrote about the long-term impacts of self-driving cars [PDF]. The Ferenstein Wire asked Anderson and other experts to double-check the validity of Metromile’s model.
“At some point in the future, it is likely that we will get to 90%
reductions in savings,” he continues, but images that such savings could be 10 or more years down the road when self-driving cars are near universal.
Self-driving cars are not yet legal and state governments have been slow to permit them. Self-driving cars face roadblocks from cautious lawmakers and could, eventually, face hurdles from the auto industry.
But, if consumers know that such laws are costing them $1,000 a year, public pressure could accelerate their legal standing. Nothing gets voters more fired up than their pocket books.
*For more stories like this, subscribe to the Ferenstein Wire newsletter here.

Will Trump’s Obamacare Replacement Provide ‘Insurance for Everybody’?
Hopefully, but the devils are in the details.
Image by Gage Skidmore, CC with attribution.
As we’ve shown with FREOPP’s health reform plan, Transcending Obamacare: A Patient-Centered Plan for Near-Universal Coverage and Permanent Fiscal Solvency, it’s possible to achieve more health insurance coverage than the Affordable Care Act does, with less government intervention, if you use a better-designed approach. I discussed this on the penultimate episode of Fox News’ The Kelly File earlier this month:

Over the weekend, Donald Trump gave an interview to the Washington Post, in which he promised that his plan to replace the Affordable Care Act will provide “insurance for everybody.” He also avers that he is going to move aggressively to tackle the high cost of prescription drugs. I write about Trump’s latest comments today for Forbes, and conclude:
In health care policy, of course, the devils are in the details. Trump says his plan will cover everyone, but we will have to wait to see whether that is likely to be the case. What’s notable is that by embracing traditional Democratic priorities, Trump is creating space for a bipartisan solution to the problem of the uninsured, something that neither side to date has been able to achieve. We will learn soon how robust his solution is.
More here.


China Life and the future of the insurance market
China Life, the 70% state-owned insurance company, has announced it is to invest $600 million in Didi Chuxing, China’s answer to Uber, about which we talked recently.
The Chinese insurance company, ranked 94th in Fortune 500 and number 13 in Fortune China, is the biggest player in the Chinese insurance market, although its share of the market has fallen by at least half since the Chinese insurance industry was liberalized in 2007, following WTO directives.
In April 2015, China Life announced it was investing $200 million in Uber, and not in its Chinese subsidiary, but globally. It is unusual to invest in direct competitors given the requirement to share confidential information with shareholders. When a company like China Life invests in competitors from the same sector, it is expected to accept restrictions regarding information about the company’s progress, which can make it hard to monitor its positions. When these investments take place despite these expected restrictions, it is obvious that the company very much wants to participate in the sector in question.
So why would a huge insurance company invest in a taxi firm? As we said at the time, the insurance market will be hit hard in the coming five years by deep changes, more changes than it has experienced in its history, and motor insurance will be affected particularly. As the car market transforms and we see a shift from individual to collective ownership or pay-to-use models, insurance companies will be forced to negotiate with the owners of large fleets, with significant negotiating power and, undoubtedly, lower margins.
This shift will be reinforced as these companies introduce self-driving vehicles, at which moment, responsibility for accidents will fall to the manufacturer or the creator of the software used to drive it.
The changing ownership model will see the emergence of well-capitalized transport companies, vehicle makers, tech firms, some of them sitting astride the automobile and insurance sectors (Uber being the most pertinent example), able to create structures with very different margins.
Add to this lower accident rates and the changes in branches such as health (wearables, monitorization, etc), the internet of things, and other factors, and it’s clear that the perspectives for change in the insurance industry are far from exaggerated.
Regarding China Life, everything seems to indicate that its strategy will consist of having more information than its competitors and that it will be able to better predict change and its impact. Having direct information about the plans of two of the companies that are clearly going to dominate the urban passenger transport sector around the world will doubtless prepare it well for those changes.
Uber, now valued at $68 billion, has been buying up tech companies and forging alliances, while it grows from city to city. Meanwhile, Didi Chuxing seems to be pursuing a strategy of buying market share through the acquisition of local players. Time will tell which of the two strategies makes the most sense. But for a largely state-owned insurance company that dominates the local market thanks to the connections of its main shareholder, taking positions in both camps would seem to make sense rather than simply waiting to see what develops.
(En español, aquí)

Insurance and the Almighty
Can we enlist religious institutions in the cause to promote fire safety?
As part of my Beyond Carlton Memorial Lecture at the headquarters of the Karnataka Fire and Emergency Services last night, I engaged in some loud thinking on why Indians (maybe others too, but I’m primarily concerned about Indians) have a cavalier attitude towards safety.
In the following chart, we see that not only do Indians under-invest in insurance, we are below the trend line when compared to other countries in the same income group.
Non-life insurance penetration (premiums as share of GDP) vs GDP per capita (2013) — Source: Swiss Re
As the second chart (below) shows, insurance penetration among motorists, home owners, SMEs and corporates is below world averages.
Compiled by Nitin Pai/The Takshashila Institution; using data from FICCI, McKinsey & Co & other sources
Why might this be the case?
Risks are underestimated and people are confident that it won’t happen to me. No figure illustrates this better than the fact that only 25% of two-wheelers have insurance when they are the most likely to suffer injuries and loss of life in road accidents.
Risks are asymmetric, different people value the potential damage differently, limiting cooperation in investing in safety measures. It is possible that the stakes are too small for a lot of people to bother about the risks.
Fatalism is pervasive: faith in destiny, the almighty and the afterlife discount the importance of human actions to prevent and mitigate accidents (like using safety equipment or purchasing insurance.)
Government support (like ex-gratia payments) and social support make insurance premiums a relatively costlier option. Social support is a good thing, but relying on it to the exclusion of self-help is not.
Bad habits like unscrupulous behaviour, poor work culture and poor quality consciouness are pervasive.
Weak liability regime and slow, unreliable judicial processes encourage irresponsible behaviour and discourage those who seek to punish it.
Regulatory complexity makes it hard for people to comply with safety regulations even if they desire to.
We are obviously looking at a Mahatma Grade Problem: too big and too complex for mere public policy to solve. Yet, there might be some ideas from behavioural economics and psychology that could inform public policy solutions.

Among the eight ideas I discussed last evening was this one: what if religious leaders and places of worship are enlisted in building awareness on fire safety and risk management?
If religious leaders encourage people to install fire safety equipment, organise fire drills and promote insurance, we could perhaps use existing social beliefs to change habits.
Given political sensitivities & constraints, fire departments might be reluctant to partner religious institutions: but citizens’ groups interested in promoting fire safety do not face similar constraints.
It’s worth a try.
A Fire Engine from Lal Bagh, Bangalore. Photo: Kiran Gopi / Wikimedia Commons. CC-BY-SA-3.0

3 Reasons Why P2P Insurtech Start-ups Will Not Disrupt the Insurance Industry
The peer-to-peer (P2P) insurtech movement will not disrupt the insurance industry.
Why?
Because P2P insurance start-ups, (or mutual insurance companies as they’ve been called before this most recent rebranding), have existed for over 400 years. There is nothing disruptive about the P2P insurance model.
image credit. Unsplash.
This doesn’t mean that there won’t be significant and exciting innovation born out of the P2P model which results in a dramatic impact on the insurance incumbents. This is especially in how we view the customer experience.
Before you can swallow this prognostication, it’s prudent to understand the difference between disruption and innovation:
Disruption: To change a long established industry in a way that industry incumbents or other tech startups have overlooked.
Innovation: The act or process of introducing new ideas, devices, or methods.
In plain language, disruption changes the nature of the game, innovation simply improves the game.
Why does the differentiation between disruption and innovation matter?
Your belief in whether P2P insurtech start-ups will disrupt or simply push innovation, informs how incumbent insurance carriers and their respective agent salesforce prepare for the future.
Disruption results in cataclysmic change.
Innovation requires incremental change.
I’m betting the injection of technology and a focus customer experience, championed by the P2P insurance movement, will force insurance incumbents to adopt the digital innovations already present throughout the greater marketplace.
Thus, improving the efficiency and quality of the insurance industry as a whole.
Here are 3 reasons why…
1) A Mutual Company By Any Other Name…
The P2P insurance model is not revolutionary, it’s not innovative, it’s not even new.
In 1696, the Hand in Hand Fire & Life Insurance Society was founded in London. It was structured as a mutual society, and for 135 years it operated its own fire brigade and played an important part in shaping fire fighting and prevention.
In America the first successful mutual insurance company was founded in 1752 by Benjamin Franklin. It was called the Philadelphia Contributionship for the Insurance of Houses From Loss by Fire, and it remains in business today.
What is P2P insurance?
Friendsurance, a Berlin based Fintech company, founded in 2010 and the first major P2P insurtech player on the world stage, was chartered with the objective of allowing small groups of people with similar insurance, to have a portion of their premium to be paid into a ‘cashback pool.’
This pool is used to pay for smaller claims. At the end of the year, the balance of the pool is distributed equally to each of the group members.
Friendsurance’s role is to act as a broker to organize primary and stop-loss coverages, utilizing some 60 insurers, and to maintain the individual and group accounts. The company’s platform helps customers find others in a social media setting to create the connections required.
So, Friendsurance is a broker, using technology to provide quasi-mutual insurance company benefits. Each P2P start-up comes at this model from a slightly different angle, but the story is the same.
Let’s breakdown exactly what a P2P insurance looks like using an article from Kyle Nakatsuji, principal at American Family Ventures, titled, “Is P2P a Realistic Alternative?”

Replace, “Peer Group,” with “Policyholder” and you’re looking at a mutual insurance company.
“The insurance system, while not without its flaws, has functioned for some time and has regulations and processes in place to mitigate adversarial circumstances. In addition, if conflict exists in the insurer/insured relationship, it likely remains present in the P2P model but shifts from customer/carrier to peer/peer.” ~ Kyle Nakatsuji
It’s tough to disrupt an industry with a business model that already exists.
2) Belief Does Not Equal Reality
Insurance industry incumbents have become complacent.
Complacency has created opportunity for technology-driven upstarts like Lemonade, InsPeer and Guevara.
While complacency may have created the void insurtech start-ups are hoping to fill, it doesn’t mean an industry with over three centuries of experience, is completely out touch.
There is a reason the insurance industry hasn’t been disrupted by Silicon Valley yet. The model isn’t broke. Could it use a tune up? Maybe a new paint job? Certainly.
Just don’t forget, the local town folk aren’t rallying together to help you rebuild your house after a fire. The only people who are going to help you rebuild after a loss work in the insurance industry.
But maybe this isn’t where insurtech start-ups are looking to make their disruption?
Take this interview with InsPeer founders, Louis de Broglie (LdB) and Emmanuelle Mury (EM) by BlueDun:
Q: At its core, insurance all about pooling of risks. Are you simply boiling the mutual insurance company down to its essence, removing a lot of overhead, and passing the savings onto consumers?
EM: Yes, completely.
LdB: But mutual companies are so big that you don’t feel a sense of community. The idea is to use technology to help you leverage your local community — with all its positive aspects. So it is true that we are coming back to the original idea of the mutual company.
The peer-to-peer advantage is the fact that you band together with your community which creates more virtuous behaviour — a lower claims rate for instance. This can only be possible if people have a sense of community.
Let’s get this straight…
All you need to do is build in a, “sense of community,” and insurance consumers are obliged to a more “virtuous behaviour,” yielding lower claim rates.
Wait, what?!
The hubris and naivete of this sentiment is astounding. Letting go the socioeconomic implications of building your own community-based risk pool and inherent discrimination and potential for redlining associated with such, what does a “sense of community” have to do with claims occurrence?
InsPeer is relying on a perceived sense of moral obligation from community risk pool members to limit small claims notifications. Even as an arm-chair economist, this philosophy seems to fly in the face of human instinct.
Bertrand Robert makes this point in his LinkedIn article, Sharing Economy and P2P Insurance, Myth and Reality:
P2P insurance, as a solidarity backed pooling, lies on expected lower claims notification and fraud.
P2P means that members of a same group would refrain from notifying small claims in order not to add burden to the pool. Not to mention that with some of those P2P vehicles, members could be expelled if deemed by other members as sharing too much of their claims. Solidarity must have limits!
Maybe self-retention of claims works with people with strong ethics, but what proportion do they represent in a context where fraud is reported to be significant in all lines of business? We can be assured that less virtuous people would never join the movement. Or more simply, the vast majority that considers they are better risks than their neighbors, therefore believe they would lose in the bargain.
Most insurance buyers can’t be bothered take ownership over their own insurance risk portfolio. Now we’re asking them to assess the risk potential of complete strangers for membership in their peer-to-peer insurance community?
Building an insurance company with the methodology of a social network makes a great headline. But I’m not sure mainstream America is ready to have their insurance claim history broadcast to friends, family and strangers.
3) True P2P Model Impact Will Only Come From Mainstream Adoption
There is no doubt the typical insurance consumer is disenfranchised by traditional insurance carriers.
Why?
Because at some point in their life, either they themselves or someone they know, has had a claim denied.
No matter who’s fault or what the reason, when a claim is denied, it’s the carrier’s fault (in the eye of public perception).
So when P2P insurance companies hit the marketplace spouting rhetoric of transparency, honesty and lower premiums, it’s understandable that people would jump to support the idea.
It’s easy to talk transformation when you’ve never had to deny a claim.
It’s only a matter of time.
Let’s examine P2P insurtech hype a little further…
The Gartner Hype Cycle is a branded graphical presentation developed and used by American Information Technology (IT) research and advisory firm Gartner for representing the maturity, adoption and social application of specific technologies.

In his article, The Hype Cycle of Insurance Disruption, Sam Gilbert of Brought By Many, explains why the P2P insurance model has already moved past the “Peak of Inflated Expectations,” and is now trending down towards the “Trough of Disillusionment.”
This positioning may seem a bit premature to Americans (as Lemonade, our first P2P insurance company has only recently hit the scene). However, cracks in the P2P insurance armor may be more visible to those following the struggles of early P2P insurtech start-ups in Europe.
As Mr. Gilbert puts it:
“On the other side of the peak of inflated expectations, there is a deepening malaise around peer-to-peer (P2P) insurance. New York’s Lemonade may have just raised a $13 million seed round, but it has a long hard road ahead. The company’s somewhat hubristic claim to be the world’s first P2P insurer suggests executives aren’t aware of Friendsurance or Guevara and the challenges these admirable businesses have faced in creating a value proposition that consumers can understand and buy into.”

It’s one thing to attract the interest of TechCrunch reporters by sniping at an industry filled with technology laggards. It’s another thing completely, surviving the wave of pessimism and negativity that comes with running a profitable insurance company.
There is currently a large gap between the ideology of peer-to-peer insurance and it’s scaled execution.
The Rub
As more and more insurtech start-ups receive sizeable investments from VC firms, the media attention alone will undoubtedly be a much needed cage rattling for incumbents.
Even in the brief six-year history of Friendsurance, eyes have been opened to the need for a great emphasis on technology utilization and improved customer experience. These are positive impacts on the insurance industry and may ultimately be the P2P insurance movement legacy.
But make no mistake, peer-to-peer insurance will not be a disruption, but rather a series of needed innovations to an otherwise complacent industry.
Thank you,
Ryan Hanley
This post was originally published on Agency Nation here.
Additional Reference Material
Peer-to-Peer Insurance: Something Old, Something New
How does Lemonade (P2P Insurance) work?
Who’s Who in Online Peer-to-Peer Insurance: From Lemonade To Guevara
Read More
We Ignored Millennials for a Decade and Now Must Act Quickly to Survive
Millennials don't like independent agents. Actually, that's not true. Millennials would like us, if only they knew who…www.agencynation.com
About People: Give a Shit.
About People: Give a Shit ¶

Why caring about the customer is NOT a marketing tactic.medium.com
Read this Post Before Your Wife Hates You for Living the #Hustle Life
The #hustle life is so damn sexy.medium.com
Never Miss a Post on Medium
Get new Medium posts by email.
Enter your email to receive updates from me.powered.by.rabbut.com

So You Have to Find Health Insurance Again…
Good news everyone! My health insurance is dropping us as they are dropping from the marketplace in December! Yay!! Seriously. Really. Hooray. Um. This is good right? This is what we wanted isn’t it?
If you work for yourself in America, if you’re starting your own business, freelance, consult, or want to…
Ask not how your country can care for you, ask what what you’re going to have to do to care for yourself.
Thus it is that again, in December, I need to find another way to cover the exceptional cost of health care in the United States.
I don’t know about you but I’m excited (is that the word?) that I get to agonize um, no not agonize, it’s on the tip of my tongue… oh! Participate, that’s the word, I get to participate yet again in finding insurance that’s even more expensive than the last plan that dropped 6 months ago. And then I get to agonize over, no, sorry I don’t mean agonize there either, calculate which of the new options is least more expensive. All while worrying, nope — being confident that I won’t have to spend hundreds of dollars out of pocket just to see all the new doctors I’ll have to see because of my preexisting conditions that they won’t just prescribe for without seeing me.
Look, I’m not getting into the partisan pissing match. I didn’t mention/blame “Obama” on purpose, as the Rs so love to do.
The failing of the system is no one’s fault and everyone’s. The mess of health insurance in the United States is only evidence of one thing, it’s a royal screw up the likes of which this country hasn’t seen since Prohibition.
It was a system designed with the Health Insurance industry in mind, it was designed to appeal to the audience that would vote it through, it was designed with things in and things out so as to get passed. That’s no one’s fault but the American public’s (yes ours) for allowing our government to work the way it does.
Had Bush put this system in place, California would have opposed it and someone would now be blaming them for messing it up.
Health care and insurance consistently available throughout the United States, throughout 50 independently governed States, throughout 50 States with completely different costs, healthcare systems, access to medical practitioners, etc. can’t be accomplished without bipartisan and public consensus on the solution. It just can’t be done. We’re not a European country the likes of which we love to cite as examples of how it can work (look! The tiny nation of Switzerland has it, why can’t we?!), we’re 50 European countries which all have to agree if we’re going to get Federal care in place across the likes of the European Union.
Let’s be honest with one another
I’d bet we generally all agree on what we want. I’m in favor of a standard of care and a marketplace that depresses consumer costs while creating incentive for resources and innovation. I do believe everyone should have a standard of care available. I believe that should include mental health, addiction, and other social illnesses we don’t do a good job of accommodating. I also believe though that cosmetic care should be entirely optional and not covered in any way other than for medical, mental, or restorative reasons. I believe we need malpractice reform and nursing union reform. I believe we need FDA and pharmaceutical patent reform. I believe insurance providers should be restricted from being able to set prices, limit care, or determine providers. I believe care costs should be completely transparent and public available.
That’s a beast of things to change.
Does it mean we’re going to end up with Single Payer? Does it mean that was the intent/goal all the time? Is that a good or bad thing? No comment. Not the point of my extensive rant. ACA was a royal screw up and no one is to blame but everyone. The question is what we do about it. What you the business owner, freelancers, startup founder, consultant do about the fact that in 6 months time, you’re going to have to go through all this again.
I think we’re supposed to be keeping a tally aren’t we? Wasn’t that a reason for this marketplace? So I’ve had to switch doctors 6 times in 3 years as the doctors work through everything. And this will be my 5th plan in as many years. So I’m in the running for 15 in 5. There’s a prize for that isn’t there? Like a gold watch or something?


Helping Consumerize Health Insurance — Full
Sally Poblete, Founder & CEO of Wellthie, chats about her mission, how the Affordable Care Act has given the insurance industry an opportunity for disruption and keeping a positive mindset through the process.
(Subscribe: YT, Soundcloud, iTunes)
Key takeaways from this episode of StartUp Health NOW can be found here.
[00:04] Unity Stoakes: Welcome to StartUp Health Now! The weekly web show that celebrates the Healthcare Transformers and changemakers reimagining health. My name is Unity Stoakes and today we are at the Wearable Tech and Digital Health Conference in New York City. We’ve got a very special guest, Healthcare Transformer Sally Poblete, who is the CEO and founder of Wellthie. Stick around. It’s going to be a great show.
[00:29] Intro Music
[01:06] Unity: Welcome Sally it’s great to be with you here again today. I thought we’d start by learning about your mission the Wellthie mission and what you’re focused on at Wellthie.
[01:17] Sally Poblete: Sure. Thank you so much for having me Unity and perhaps I’ll start by just mentioning that I’m a former health insurance executive from Anthem. Also a licensed insurance broker and despite my industry expertise like most people out there I found the process of choosing and buying insurance to be quite cumbersome.
[01:36] Sally: I set out to make this process using technology simple design and a focus on education to be much more simple and engaging for businesses and individuals. What we offer is a modern and smart marketplace whereby businesses and individuals with the help of their broker can find the most affordable insurance for them. We license this technology to insurance carriers and brokers who are eager to have engaging and effective e-commerce marketplaces.
[02:08] Unity: What’s the model? Is it in the clouds, Saas model?
[02:12] Sally: It is in the clouds, It’s Saas. It can be white labeled to our customers. They could be insurance companies and we have several already to date as well as large brokers who are eager to get into the retail environment and offer a really modern e-commerce experiences for their customers.
[02:32] Unity: Why are we seeing so much innovation today specifically in the insurance industry? It seems like there’s a big need but what’s going on today? What are the conditions and why is it so needed?
[02:47] Sally: Insurances are a really interesting industry. First of all, it’s gigantic. There are almost a trillion dollars in premium in the health sector alone. Second when you think about insurance you often think about managing risk and regulation. Those two things are not at all synonymous with innovation and disruption. Third, it’s a very old Industry. It’s at among the fortune 500 companies who are insurance. In the insurance industry the average age is 95 years old.
[03:24] Sally: This old huge and what we believe is you know largely unaddressed in terms of technological innovation is ripe for lots of creativity simplicity and innovation today.
[03:41] Unity: Why now? Was there an ah-ha moment? you spent so many years as an executive in the industry was there something that you saw? Either the macro conditions changing or something maybe very specific that sort of gave you that aha moment that you had to start Wellthie?
[04:02] Sally: Yeah. So, again back to regulation in the market forces. The Affordable Care Act as you know has broad significant market expansion to people buying insurance and needing insurance because they are required to do so by the Affordable Care Act. Secondly, the Affordable Care Act has brought more transparency in standardization in the way that insurance prices are determined where previously that was pretty opaque and you know kind of in a black box. The third is that the industry has gone retail and to be a successful retail one must engage the end consumer and it’s no longer sufficient to have a strong brand as an insurance carrier to also be a successful retailer.
[04:52] Sally: Last but certainly not least we are in the age of the digital consumer where we all are used to seamless 24–7 convenient experiences in all aspects of our lives and so expect that from purchasing insurance as well. Yet, we rely on and benefit from the help of experts who help make this very big important purchase a confident one. So, that’s exactly what we’re doing. Wellthie’s mission to simplify and modernize the process but also help the experts in the form of brokers and other intermediaries support their customers.
[05:37] Unity: It’s so Interesting. So, basically at the heart of this challenge here is we’ve got this legacy industry as you said that’s been around for a hundred years and longer. It’s very complicated in the entire way they’ve been selling, is completely changing. I’d be interested to know. Who do you think is going to crack this code? Obviously, Wellthie is focusing on it but what are the ingredients needed to be able to really simplify this very complex business?
[06:17] Sally: Yeah. So, we think that one of our key strengths and differentiators is that we are industry experts who have come out of this complicated, nuanced industry and innovating from essentially within and partnering with those incumbents to help Innovate. We think that that domain expertise coupled with the rest of our team’s technology and innovation expertise are the key ingredients to making a change. Our mission is in our team’s passion for doing this, is so strong, but at the same time, we have a healthy respect for the regulation in the nuance frankly. The differences in the markets and the distribution channels and the products that often are overlooked by pure tech companies who may not realize just how entrenched and how complicated the existing system is. But because we understand that we have a good grounding in the opportunities to pick first and where to innovate next.
[07:27] Unity: So it sounds like your strategy is more of a collaborative, focus on collaboration with industry from the beginning as opposed to completely going around like many technology companies sort of do in healthcare?
[07:42] Sally: Yeah I think so. I think that collaborative approach has really been a key to our success. We count today in terms of our customer’s insurance companies who have leveraged our technology and are now leading in terms of their own innovation, and as well as working with brokers small businesses and individuals. So I think that that’s a great way to put it and really proud of the way that we’ve approached the industry today.
[08:13] Unity: What has your experience been? Just shifting gears a little as a female founder CEO in this industry, specifically, both from a technology perspective of the industry but also the insurance industry? What’s your experience been like as a female founder?
[08:28] Sally: Yeah. We need more female founders. I’ll say that. There are not very many women CEOs or entrepreneurs within the tech insurance and healthcare arenas. Yet what’s really stark contrast is that eighty percent of all healthcare decisions in the family are made by women. So, having the female mindset operating within a male-dominated world I’d say has been an opportunity for us to differentiate and I’ve been using it as really a source of strength rather than a barrier to us and growing the company.
[09:13] Unity: Wonderful. Do you have any advice? There’s a wave of new entrepreneurs always coming into this sector which is very exciting. Do you have advice for these new entrepreneurs coming into the health sector or lessons learned maybe that you can share? For those just getting started?
[09:34] Sally: Yeah. Two things come to mind often when I reflect upon the journey so far and that is that I used to think I had to have the perfect idea or all of the resources or things in place in order to start a company and what I’ve learned through the journey is that so much has been certainly having a focus and having a mission is very important but so much of how we’ve approached the market has been in response to the feedback from our customers and the experiences we’ve had. So, it’s been more iterative than having everything right from the get-go.
[10:11] Sally: So I’d say to the aspiring entrepreneurs out there to take the plunge. To go out there and take the first step and I think there’s no substitute to actually hearing and listening to market feedback to tweak and perfect that and get that product market fit.
[10:33] Sally: I think the other thing more so I’d say the things that I try to share with my own children is building resilience and practicing resilience every day because the constant onslaught of challenges and change and rejection and lots and lots of other difficulties on the road to entrepreneurship require a soft healthy dose of resilience and frankly gratitude for the accomplishments that we’ve got me to date.
[11:12] Unity: One of the big challenges as you alluded to all these ups and downs as an entrepreneur. What do you do personally to keep a positive mindset or maybe hobbies that you do to have fun and sort of get through the challenging times of your journey?
[11:32] Sally: Yeah. Those ups and downs really are a part of life. I’d say I’m proud to have two inspiring daughters and I think them and my husband are what balances me every day and when I get home and know that they’re happy and healthy and that the home life is good. That really provides good perspective that the ups and downs of entrepreneurship like parenthood are just that and there’re more highs than there are low so life is good.
[12:10] Unity: Wonderful thank you so much for everything that you do. It’s great to be with you here today and thanks for your time.
[12:15] Sally: Thank You Unity.
[12:16] Unity: Thank you, we’ll see you soon.
[12:21] Chime

The insurance industry is comically un-customer centric
Even when it’s #InsurTech., even when they’re trying to be customer centric.
I recently read this LinkedIn post. The content is actually rather good, making 10 insightful predictions about what innovations will (should?) happen in the insurance industry this year.
The Top 10 Insurtech Trends for 2017 that set the Digital Insurance Agenda
December is usually the month to predict key trends for the year to come, and so it goes with the insurtech sector as…www.linkedin.com
The general premise is ‘be customer led’. But the language it uses is anything but. There are some amazing contenders for the FT’s Jargon Awards in there.
So let me translate the jargon into customer for you…
Massive cost savers in claims, operations and customer acquisition
“Don’t make me pay for your profligacy / inefficiency / anachronism”
A new face on digital transformation: engagement innovation
“Meet my needs, don’t just try and sell me stuff.”
Next level data analytics capabilities and AI; to really unlock the potential of IoT
“Do something useful with all the information you’re collecting from me.”
Addressing the privacy concerns
“Don’t betray my trust or be incompetent.”
Contextual pull platforms
“Don’t make me jump through your hoops.”
The marketplace model will find its way to insurance
“Help me get the products that best meet my needs.”
Use of algorithms for front-liner empowerment
“Help your people be better at customer service.”
Anyway, it wouldn’t be very sporting of me to just point out other’s foibles. So here’s what we’re trying to do to make insurance more customer-centric…
Simples
Simples is a new digital service we’ve been working on for Compare the Market.

You can upload any insurance policy to start using Simples (whether you bought it through Compare the Market or not). It will keep your documents safe and secure; summarise them into bite sized pieces of information; and help you feel organised, confident and in control.
It’s in beta, so why not check it out? https://my.simples.uk.com/home

5 Trends Impacting Insurance Business Models
Business models in the insurance industry are undergoing significant changes. Highlighted are five major trends that drive this evolution.
1. The “Tyranny” of Customers
Connected customers expect an efficient (speed, simplicity), engaging (fun, using natural interfaces) and seamless experience (anything, anywhere, anytime). They also ask for services customized to their needs, with the ability to turn cover on and off (personalization, with transparency on trade-offs).
What this means for insurance business models:
Differentiation on experience design
Provision of on-demand Insurance services
Examples of InsurTech: Slice Labs, Trov, Metromile
2. The Power of Analytics
Data analytics has made significant progress from statistical reasoning to machine learning. It can be leveraged to extract information from large amounts of structured and unstructured data and identify patterns. For instance, the analysis of customer data can deliver valuable insights in terms of segmentation and behaviors. The combination of connected sensors (car telematics, connected home, drones, etc.) with advanced analytics is enabling a dynamic modeling of risks. In the field of automation, cognitive computing coupled with robotics process automation allows for cognitive automation: computer software can collect and extract knowledge, recognize patterns, learn, adapt to new situations and automate human activities (allowing employees to focus on activities with higher value added).
What this means for insurance business models:
Improved decision making processes and dynamic risk modeling through data analytics
“Smart” automation of processes leveraging cognitive computing
Examples of InsurTech: Nauto, Cape Analytics
3. The Era of Platforms
The “Platformification” trend is about leveraging the power of platforms and APIs in open environments, to create new marketplaces and new ecosystems.
What this means for insurance business models:
Development of a platform strategy
New partnerships
Example of InsurTech: Instanda
4. The Decentralization of Trust
Insurance companies can leverage new trusted infrastructures (such as but not limited to blockchain technology) to distribute products and interact with customers without intermediaries. In addition, smart contracts can enforce the execution of business logic and support the development of parametric insurance services.
What this means for insurance business models:
More direct/efficient services (with less middle-men)
Provision of P2P Insurance services
Development of Parametric Insurance
Examples of InsurTech: Friendsurance, Guevara, InsurETH
5. The Inclusion of Underserved Populations
This is a global trend and various technologies that can be used to provide insurance services to underserved populations. For instance the combination of mobile technology and blockchain technology allow to deliver micro-payments and micro-insurance services.
What it means for insurance business models:
Provision of micro-insurance services
Examples of InsurTech: Bima, Worldcover
Article first published here https://www.startupbootcamp.org/blog/2016/12/5-trends-impacting-insurance-business-models/


Company Culture as an Insurance Policy
This week I met an entrepreneur who is looking to expand his company significantly. They are a well known brand in their region and have been around for long enough to have had a strong amount of press, both locally and in several national business publications. That coverage has typically centered around their amazing company culture, employee onboarding, training, and overall positive business approach.
When he launched, he decided that treating employees with respect, empowering them, and insuring their human dignity was the most important thing a business owner could ever do. That’s how he continues to operate his company to this very day. Employees have strong benefits, profit sharing, growth opportunities, education credits, and more. He wants them to know that once they are part of his company, they are now one of the owners right next to him. Expectations are set high and employees are expected to hold one another accountable. To keep their word. To support one another. To show up every day and deliver.
His culture building techniques have been so widely embraced that hundreds of CEO’s have visited his company to learn more about his practices. To figure out the magic behind why so few of his employees leave. And why if they do leave, he normally knows well ahead of time and can prepare. His hiring, training, and managing practices are not unique. They are a mashup of what hundreds of famous business people have preached from podiums and video cameras and books for years. The difference is that he actually practices them in real life, as opposed to pontificating.
And company culture saved his business when all was almost lost.
As I have written about, sometimes there are a small sliver of companies that fail (I estimate around 1%) that were successful, well run and managed, profitable, scaling, and in growth industries, that simply found themselves in a disaster situation where they failed for no reason of their own. His business was all of the above and a rapid sequence of events outside his control simultaneously ripped his company apart. The kind of situation where your jaw drops just listening to it and you're amazed the person is still standing.
When everything seemed the darkest. Two weeks out from missing payroll for the first time ever. Less than a month before he estimated they would need to declare bankruptcy. After he had already told all his employees that they should get their resumes in order immediately. He decided to do one final act of defiance against failing…
He wrote a letter. The letter outlined the proud history of the company, the series of events that lead to the current dire situation, what needed to happen if the company was to survive, an apology to his customers that he couldn’t do more, and to let them know it had been an honor to serve them for the past years. While he held onto a fleeting belief that maybe a miracle could happen, the primary reason was to simply write them all a goodbye note and thank them for the memories. He loved his company, he loved his employees, and he loved his customers. He wanted to write the final chapter on his company before the press got to write their version.
What happened next is a scene out of every underdog movie ever. (Cue the triumphant music…) He knew some people would respond. He expected some calls. Some emails. Some visitors stopping by. What he got was nothing short of incredible. As he sat in front of me recounting the story, I could see the tears he was holding back. It’s been a handful of years, but he still can’t believe the kindness he received.
Hundreds and hundreds of people emailed, called, texted, or showed up in person. They offered support of every kind imaginable from buying more from his company (including buying more than they needed) to helping him find financing to referring everyone they knew to buy from him as well to even addressing these outside forces that were crushing his business at that moment (such as calling his bank demanding they extend him financing). His business doubled that first month and continued to grow for the next six months straight. By the end of the year he was profitable and stable again. He had gotten his miracle.
Except, it wasn’t a miracle. It didn’t come out of nowhere. It wasn’t supernatural. It came out of years and years of doing the right thing. Of treating everyone that he came across with respect, dignity, and warmth. Of giving back twice what he got in return. Of putting people and company culture ahead everything no matter what. It was the one thing he would never compromise on.
It turned out, his customers had noticed. His employees were so well trained, professional, and satisfied in their work that they brought that over into every interaction with customers. They treated customers with the same level of warmth and respect that they got from him. Because of this, his customers, partners, employees, and friends felt like his business was family. That it was such a violation of right and wrong for him to have to go out of business for a series of unfortunate events. That is was too disgusting of a thought to not fight for something they saw so rarely in the business world. Almost as if his customers felt they needed his company to keep existing to retain their faith that a business that behaves like his can thrive in this country.
It turned out that great company culture was an amazing insurance policy.
The kind of policy you can’t buy. It has to be earned.
— — — — — — — — — —
If you enjoyed this piece, please hit Recommend!
This article was written from scratch and published the same day as part of a 31 day writing challenge. To follow me on Medium through this writing challenge, go here:https://medium.com/the-writing-challenge
You can find me on Twitter here. Linkedin here.


Insurance Startups: Digitally Native is not Enough
Insurance is the hottest sub-sector of fintech these days. This is driven by a number of very real trends that make meaningful disruption of the insurance industry possible today: terrible industry NPS, lack of engagement from the next generation of buyers, lack of product innovation, and reams of new data available for underwriting, pricing and targeting risk. Given this confluence of trends, one of the most exciting investment areas is the opportunity to re-imagine existing insurance product to build a new insurance carrier that resonates with the next generation of insurance buyers. This means either insuring new emergent risks or fundamentally changing existing product. As we think about opportunities to build new carriers in insurance, there is a lot that we can learn from the consumer cost savings and customer experience improvements that online lenders pioneered in the past decade.
It is easy to assume the value of LendingClub, Prosper, et al is driven by the P2P model, but the truth is more nuanced. P2P lenders, or really marketplace lenders (MPL) as it evolved to, have grown rapidly not because of P2P, but rather the economic surplus that the model creates for borrowers. LendingClub and Prosper save the average consumer ~700 BPS on a loan they refinance through those platforms (say taking credit card debt costing 20% and reducing it to 13%). They can do this by reducing significant cost in the system and superior risking. This is a true economic advantage. The fact that it can be transacted purely online is the icing on the cake. The lower cost drives a lot of demand, and institutional investors follow to where there is high quality risk-adjusted yield. MPL is not what drives the loan volumes, but rather the loan value is driven by the economic surplus for the borrower that MPL creates.
When we look at insurance, the same opportunity to create economic surplus exists by leveraging the myriad new data sources available. New data can provide huge value in not just the underwriting process but also in the quoting and prospecting processes. In the life insurance market, leveraging new datasets via API could allow for a much more streamlined and accurate risking and pricing process. In homeowners, CoreLogic offers a huge amount of data to underwriters, but it is often inaccurate requiring redundant on-site visits; if you could acquire more accurate data about a property at the time of quote, insurers could price risk at scale with far more accuracy and underwrite quicker. With aerial photography, drones, IOT, and machine learning this is doable, and leaders in the industry are clamoring for these abilities. All of these data sources will make it easier for the industry (disruptors or incumbents) to offer a better price to the best risk classes. The challenge for incumbents is that their IT systems are not set up to consume these data via API.
The previous point notwithstanding, MPL also offers a significantly improved customer experience. While the press may like to make a big deal of MPLs online-only distribution, the truth is that underwriters at incumbent banks are completely removed from the borrower as well — they never meet the person face-to-face. For instance, a Bank of America card customer with direct deposit into their checking account must still resubmit all of their personal information for underwriting a limit increase — despite the fact that the bank already has access to all of this data. Getting a new unsecured loan, or refinancing student debt is even more painful. MPL reviews the same data, but consumes it more efficiently, and processes it faster such that fully underwritten decisions are returned to the customer in days rather than weeks or months. In venture capital, we often say that if you’re differentiating on UX you need to have a 10x improvement in experience — this is hard to measure, though when you experience it often feels like “magic”.
This brings us to insurance innovation. There are many people attempting to build a “full-stack” insurance company. These new platforms are often digitally native and promise a significantly improved customer experience. The challenge here is that outside of health insurance, few insurance verticals have multiple touch points a year with the insured where these improved experiences can create value. Outside of claims events, life and P&C (home, auto, etc.) are mostly set it and forget it policies. Thus in these markets the biggest opportunity to improve experience is around the initial acquisition and underwriting of a customer. Insurance is brutally competitive from an acquisition point of view and conversion funnels often see greater than 50% drop-off from the initial touch point with a customer to binding a policy. While the current agent-based distribution model may seem antiquated (it is) and sub-optimal to attract the next generation of buyer (it is); there is a good reason why agents get ~80% of first year premium — its hard work to source and bind high quality risk. The big opportunity for insure tech is not to make the existing insurance products digitally native, but rather to fundamentally alter the product or its underwriting process to create an order of magnitude improvement to the customer’s experience.
Ultimately, to meaningfully acquire customers, innovative “full-stack” insurance companies, like online lenders, need to offer a better price and experience as compared to incumbents. If a new entrant is only price-competitive, they will need to offer a 10x improvement in customer experience. The good news is that there is a lot opportunity for innovation here and the market is massive. Insurance companies have left a yawning gap when it comes to customer experience, and a multitude of new data sources will undoubtedly complement the current underwriting process. The challenge for insurance startups is not to copy lending, but rather find the “magic” in this market that fundamentally changes how insurance products are purchased and sold.
Originally published at medium.com on June 10, 2016.


15 Startups Disrupting the Car Insurance Industry
Read the full story here.
As InsuranceTech becomes one of the hottest FinTech sectors around the world, the growing numbers of bright entrepreneurs are looking to enter the race for a trillion-dollar industry disruption. Although January 2016 wasn’t particularly fruitful for InsuranceTech startups in terms of funds raised (1% of all funds raised within FinTech), in 2016, we may see more InsuranceTech startups expanding the presence and gathering more attention and funding given that InsuranceTech demonstrated its amazing potential with some recent exciting (or scary?) news on an AI bot replacing humans.
The LTP team has been actively following InsuranceTech and developed an expertise in various sectors of the large industry. Recently, we wrote about some of the interesting and promising InsuranceTech companies disrupting healthcare industry. However, healthcare is not the only trillion-dollar industry that has developed into a complex and cumbersome system around the world. Car insurance sector is another one where bright entrepreneurs are actively looking for ways to improve customer experience and reduce the costs of necessities like insurance for a personal vehicle.
Apply Now
Here are some of the interesting and promising InsuranceTech companies that are disrupting the car insurance industry.
Censio
Censio is a smartphone-only, usage-based insurance platform that helps increasing adoption, reducing costs and collecting better data to drive risk algorithms.
CoverFox
CoverFox is an online insurance destination containing all types of policies across carriers that can be directly bought on the platform.
The Zebra
The Zebra is the nation’s largest quote comparison platform which focuses on car insurance. Car owners can anonymously compare dozens of insurance companies in real time and begin seeing estimated quotes with as little as two pieces of information. Real-time updates provide a transparent shopping experience.
Cuvva
Cuvva was launched in October as an iOS app that enables the user to sign up, get a quote and buy cover in less than 10 minutes. Cuvva offers a completely digital experience run from a smartphone. It is a totally new type of UK car insurance that gets users covered on a car for only as long as they need it — from a single hour to a whole day.
Claim Di
Claim Di is a mobile application for facilitating communication and claims between drivers and their insurance companies. The drivers or car owners can download Claim Di and shake the phone near the phone of another party who also uses Claim Di. The insurance companies of both sides will issue claim reports via the Claim Di application, drivers can then separate immediately without the need to wait for surveyors.

RenewBuy
RenewBuy offers the simplest way to renew car insurance in a couple of minutes, providing quotes. RenewBuy focuses on car & bike insurance and aims to offer the lowest premiums and issue your policy instantly. The platform works in real time and provides the best available price specific for the vehicle model.
insuremyrentalcar.com
insuremyrentalcar.com provides collision damage waiver and loss damage waiver policies for use with rental vehicles in the US. The company’s package starts from $5 a day to $93.99 per year.
Continue exploring more companies here.


Travel Insurance: A How-To Guide for Property Managers
Does It Make Sense to Offer Travel Insurance?
If you’re debating whether or not to offer travel insurance to your guests, try looking at it from your guests’ perspective.
Granted, not everyone will need travel insurance, however, there are certain guests who will (e.g. those with medical conditions, elderly travelers or on-call military) and certain travel situations that almost necessitate the coverage (e.g. renting an expensive vacation home for a family reunion, traveling internationally or traveling to a hurricane prone region during hurricane season). If even a small portion of your guests would be interested in travel insurance and it was simple to access, then why not provide it for them?
In the vacation rental industry, a majority of reservations require prepayment and enforce strict cancellation conditions. As you can imagine, if a guest lost several thousand dollars due to strict cancellation conditions and hadn’t been offered insurance, their relationship with the vacation rental manager would be strained at best. To protect this relationship and the resulting revenue stream, more property managers are offering travel insurance to their guests than ever before.
An additional benefit property managers receive from travel insurance is a steady revenue stream. While the additional revenue incurred might seem insignificant compared to the rental revenue, a property manager with just a few properties could add thousands to their annual bottom-line.
Step 1: Research your 3 C’s
The first step of offering travel insurance is to research the 3 C’s: coverage, claims and cool technology (it’s a stretch, I know!).
When looking at product coverage start with the basics, which will require information from each provider’s website. You’ll want to ensure that the policy you are considering has broad enough coverage for trip cancellation, trip interruption, emergency medical expense, accidental death and dismemberment, and some kind of baggage protection. More inclusive policies might even cover items such as change fees, ticket reimbursement, missed connection, or car rental coverage. This takes some time, but your guests sure aren’t going to read the policy details, so it’s your responsibility to offer them something that will keep them happy.
The technology that will work best to get insurance offerings to your guests depends on the technical sophistication of your website and your booking processes. An easy first step for most companies is to include the link to your travel insurance website in your confirmation emails with guests. If you’re willing to work closely with your travel insurance provider and operations manager, a more effective tactic is to embed your travel insurance offering in the booking process, which looks differently for each property manager and requires an adaptive travel insurance partner.
Most importantly, you’ll want to ensure that your travel insurance partner is fair to customers and pays claims. If your guests struggle to collect on their claims it will reflect negatively on your company, despite no direct involvement. The best place to determine the track record of your provider is on Squaremouth, a leading insurance comparison site with more than 42,000 verified reviews on 21 travel insurance providers alone.
Finish What You’ve Started: Implementation and Integration
Once you’ve decided on a provider, reach out to determine exactly what they can do for you and your guests. If you’re pleased with what you hear, you’ll receive instructions to set up your account and begin the process of offering travel insurance to your guests, which will vary depending on the insurance provider.
About The Author and Company
Dylan DeClerck is the head of sales and marketing at Pablow.com, a travel insurance technology provider and broker that helps property managers offer travel insurance to their guests hassle-free. The company is based in Iowa and provides travel insurance to more than 15,000 vacation rental properties in the United States. Dylan is also the Executive Director of a non-profit that teaches athletics to at-risk youth and he enjoys playing professional ultimate frisbee.
Powered by Hostfully
Create a beautiful guidebook for your vacation rental guests


24 Companies Shaping InsuranceTech Globally
Read the full story here.
USA
Embroker
Embroker aims to revolutionize the way businesses buy, manage and understand insurance. The company combines the service and expertise of the best-in-class brokers with an innovative technology platform. The 100% online solution allows to optimize insurance spending with policy benchmarking tools, provides a real-time interface to track & manage claims and has many other beneficial features.

Lemonade
Lemonade is a P2P, technology-first and legacy-free insurance carrier, offering a product that is instantaneous, un-conflicted and delightful. The company — which has not been launched yet — raised $13 million from Sequoia Capital, Expansion Venture Capital and Aleph.
Uvamo
Uvamo works as a marketplace where both insurance seekers and investors planning to invest in the insurance sector come together. The company leverages technology and replaces the traditional middleman, thereby providing lower premiums to policyholders and attractive risk-adjusted returns to investors. Uvamo’s online data and technology allow to quickly assess the risk of the desired insurance policy and assign appropriate premiums.
Apply Now
Bauxy
The company enables users to file their out-of-network claims by taking a photo of their bill. No more waiting on the phone with insurance companies, asking where reimbursements are, or getting frustrated and screwed over. Bauxy doesn’t charge any hidden fees and submits the claim on the user’s behalf.
Allay
Allay enables companies to work with the broker of their choice to do online, paperless health insurance purchasing, and full HR and benefits administration. Companies can ensure compliance with local and federal employment laws, have all their benefits plans in one place, and help employees understand their benefits and self-manage their HR information — everything online.
Insureon
Insureon is an online insurance agent for small and micro-businesses. Services include professional liability, errors and omissions, general liability, business owner policy, workers’ compensation, umbrella/excess liability, property, employment practices liability and cyber liability.
Crimson Informatics
The company is trying to disrupt the auto insurance market. Crimson’s hardware and software gather data on a driver’s behavior, giving insurance firms data and metrics on which to base the premium.
Metromile
The startup has created a device that captures mileage data to determine how much a person should pay for their car insurance policy. Free plug-in device turns ordinary cars into smart cars. The device works with Metromile’s smartphone app (Metronome), which diagnoses the health of the car, location and offers tips to help the user with their daily commute.
insuremyrentalcar.com
The company provides collision damage waiver and loss damage waiver policies for use with rental vehicles in the US. The company’s package starts from $5 a day to $93.99 per year.
Oscar
Oscar is a FinTech unicorn ($1.5 billion valuation) in the insurance space with notable investors like Google Ventures, Google Capital, Goldman Sachs, Khosla Ventures and others. Oscar aims to revolutionize insurance through data, technology and design.
PolicyGenius
The company offers highly tailored insurance checkup platform, where users can discover their coverage gaps and review solutions for their exact needs. PolicyGenius provides the only place online to shop for life, long-term disability, renters and pet insurance through its highly accurate quoting engines that offer side-by-side comparisons of tailored policies.
The Zebra
The Zebra is the nation’s largest quote comparison platform which focuses on car insurance. Car owners can anonymously compare dozens of insurance companies in real time and begin seeing estimated quotes with as little as two pieces of information. Real-time updates provide a transparent shopping experience.
UK
Guevara
Guevara is a whole new way to think about car insurance. The service allows users to pool premiums online to save money. Unlike traditional insurance, any money left in the pool at the end of the year stays with the group and lowers everyone’s price next year. Users that keep claims low can save up to 80%.
BoughtByMany
Bought By Many is a free, members-only service that helps users to find insurance for the things in life that are out of the ordinary. Members save an average of 18.6%. The company negotiates discounts directly with insurers for the clients’ unique situations.
Continue exploring more companies here.


80 Hottest InsurTech Companies Shaking up the Trillion-Dollar Insurance Industry
Read the full story here.
Knip
Knip is an innovative digital insurance manager that provides users with an easy-to-understand overview and analysis of existing insurance policies, tariffs and services.
Clark
Clark is an insurance platform that provides a transparent, cheap and comprehensive insurance cover.
Brolly
Brolly is a UK-based personal insurance management app and broker that allows users to manage their policies in one place and understand where they have duplicate or missing coverage.
FinanceFox
FinanceFox provides users the option to manage and optimize all insurances in one app. Current insurances are retrievable with one click and users can get personal advice in order to optimize your policies.
Censio
Censio is a smartphone-only, usage-based insurance platform that helps in increasing adoption, reducing costs and collecting better data to drive risk algorithms.
Trov
Trov offers Web and mobile applications to help users track possessions and assist in advising in wealth and estate planning, property management, insurance coverage, private social connectivity, asset disposition, charitable giving and more.
Sure
Sure claims to be the newest innovation in personal insurance that will be launching on-demand insurance worldwide this year.
Insurify
Insurify offers the fastest way to compare car insurance quotes.

ROOT
ROOT is a tech company that offers an app to provide the best insurance rates for good drivers.
Snapsheet
Snapsheet, previously known as BodyShopBids, is a free app for iPhone, Android and the Web that allows users to receive bids from local auto body shops.
Spex
Spex is a technology platform that enables users to better handle disaster-related insurance claim inspections.
Bought By Many
Bought By Many is a free, members-only service that helps users to find insurance for the things in life that are out of the ordinary. Members save an average of 18.6%. The company negotiates discounts directly with insurers for the clients’ unique situations.
PeerCover
PeerCoveris the only P2P insurance provider in New Zealand. PeerCover does not involve lending money to friends and family; instead, PeerCover makes cost-sharing simple and hassle-free and as a bonus, users can help out peers.
Find out more here.
Guevara
Guevara is a whole new way to think about car insurance. The service allows users to pool premiums online to save money. Unlike traditional insurance, any money left in the pool at the end of the year stays with the group and lowers everyone’s price next year. Users that keep claims low can save up to 80%.
Uvamo
Uvamo works as a marketplace where both insurance seekers and investors planning to invest in the insurance sector come together. The company leverages technology and replaces the traditional middleman, thereby providing lower premiums to policyholders and attractive risk-adjusted returns to investors. Uvamo’s online data and technology allow to quickly assess the risk of the desired insurance policy and assign appropriate premiums.
Friendsurance
Friendsurance has implemented the concept of online P2P insurance which combines social networks with well-established insurance companies. Customers can connect to form individual insurance networks, thereby lowering their annual insurance premiums by up to 50%.
insPeer
insPeer allows users to share insurance “deductibles” with their friends and family members. It allows users to select the people with whom they plan to share the deductibles.
Continue exploring more companies here.


InsuranceTech Innovation Booms: Challenges and Opportunities
Read the full article here.
The prosperity of the FinTech industry has not seen limits yet. With the growing density of the “unicorns” club and speeding up of innovation adoption, bright entrepreneurs are entering the race for disruption in a variety of industries. However, there has been a blind spot in the US where little to nothing changed in many years. We are talking about the biggest industry in the US with net premiums of $1.1 trillion in 2014 — insurance.
Insurance carriers and related activities contributed $421.4 billion, or 2.5% of the United States’ gross domestic product in 2013, according to the US Bureau of Economic Analysis. Yet, with $3 billion coming into FinTech in Q4 2014,the insurance industry in the US — with a massive distrust and caution to the players — has not seen wide disruption from technology companies. There are certain challenges that cause the slow entrance of FinTech to the space. However, there are also amazing opportunities as it is relatively fresh and untouched by innovation. Interestingly, it’s not only the startups that are starting paying attention to the industry. There are financial institutions and tech companies taking attempts to leverage the opportunities.
Challenges for FinTech in the insurance industry

As a starter, one of the greatest challenges for FinTech to enter the space is a highly regulated environment which is creating high barriers. Just like the financial services industry, insurance is a complex system is the US that has been a controversial topic for policymakers.
Regulations for the insurance industry can be fairly called the worst ones. There are different levels of control which require complex compliance and investments in licensing along with competition with long-time established industry giants with assets to control the policy.
Due to the complexity and extraordinarily high risk, new entrants have to be able to ensure the coverage of risks with significant funds. This has created serious barriers for lean FinTech startups since startups usually have limited resources.
Insurance is an interesting product that one maintains over a lifetime. Demand for insurance is only growing, involving even more risk with each new customer. Growing risk accordingly requires growing assets. It brings us to the same problem for startups — FinTech cannot ensure an endless and constant growth of assets as startups are coming and going with only a few being able to reach the success club.
Microinsurance Network, the only global multi-stakeholder platform of the microinsurance industry and experts,assessed the main market challenges and added to the list the lack of awareness, insufficient distribution network, and high level of claims, local regulations, moral hazard and lack of access to reinsurance among others.
There is another trick startups cannot avoid called anti-selection, brought up by the Microinsurance Network. At the early stage with the highest vulnerability, startups are doomed to get attentions from the pool of the population that is for some reason ignored by the established players. If you think of it, these people are most likely representing the high-risk population. Taking a large pool of high-risk customers onboard is not the best strategy for startups to get into the space.
Opportunities are in data and customization

At this point, it may seem that only the crazy ones would take a shot at entering the insurance industry. Surprisingly, there are technology startups on their way to shake up the space and take their stake in the trillion-dollar industry.
Companies like Oscar, Elliptic, Stride Health, Simplesurance, SimplyInsured, Eligible, Oration, Metromile and others have demonstrated that the task is not impossible to perform. Slowly but gradually, the insurance industry will see unicorns emerging in the space across verticals.
One of the most interesting examples is Elliptic, the world’s first company to secure insurance for blockchain assets. It is also the world’s first company of a type to achieve accreditation from a Big Four audit firm, KPMG. The company offers a real-time AML protection for bitcoin.
Another exciting company is Oscar, a FinTech unicorn in the insurance space with notable investors like Google Ventures, Google Capital, Goldman Sachs, Khosla Ventures and others. Oscar aims to revolutionize insurance through data, technology and design. According to The New York Times, Oscar is valued at $1.5 billion.
We have been covering exciting business models to take over the insurance industry with attention to micro-insurance and pay-as-you-go insurance. What will truly change the nature of the industry is the shift from complex long-term insurance products to the fractions of insurance for a particular moment, time, miles count. The new opportunities to come are tied to mobile devices and time-efficiency. Insurance doesn’t have to take a week to set up; no doubt, it is a matter of time when we will be able to sign up for microinsurance in minutes on our smartphones. There are already examples in emerging markets like Bima Mobile, MicroEnsure, MFS Africa and others.
The opportunities are only growing over time with data being actively accumulated in one’s devices. Health-tracking devices and smartphones are now capable of monitoring and storing the physical metrics of a person, which — in the future — can be applied to the insurance apps to contribute to the risk management and to offer more customized solutions.
Insurance doesn’t necessarily have to be something we are looking for in case of actual problems or accidents. The shape of insurance can change from saving at a dramatic moment to preventing it through data. Health-tracking devices will eventually be a part of the industry, helping to take care of our own health and save money on the policy purchased.
Google Maps can eventually be in the center of car insurers as a source of estimation for customized insurance. Risks vary from mile to mile and from location to location. Flat massive scheme can’t offer flexibility. With constant improvement of maps and location tracking, car insurance will change drastically.
Continue reading here.

Reduced Viability? Banks, Insurance Companies, and Low Interest Rates
Almost all major US banks comfortably passed the US Federal Reserve’s stress tests last month.
While that’s certainly good news, the purpose of these tests is to determine whether banks “have effective capital planning processes and sufficient capital to absorb losses during stressful conditions,” not whether they can earn a risk-adjusted return even close to what they were accustomed to in previous decades.
And there is reason to wonder about that, for both banks, insurance companies, and indeed any institution that generally depends on the spread between short liabilities and longer assets for its profits.
Such spreads are largely vanishing as benchmark yields around the world continue to hit new lows. Earlier this month, yields on both Japanese and German 10-year sovereign bonds entered negative territory. The 10-year US Treasury yield hit an all-time low at under 1.4%.
How Do Low Interest Rates Affect Bank Profitability?
The Fed recently released a paper entitled “‘Low-for-Long’: Interest Rates and Net Interest Margins of Banks in Advanced Foreign Economies” that considers precisely this question. The study looked at bank profitability in advanced financial economies during low- and high-rate environments between 2005 and 2013.
A low-rate environment was defined as a time when a country’s three-month sovereign bond yield was 1.25% or below, while a high-rate period was when that yield was above 1.25%.
Though asset and liability composition were similar in both environments, the findings indicated a strong link between interest rates and net interest margins (NIMs). That relationship intensified during low-rate periods:
“The new empirical analysis shows that low rates are contributing to weaker NIMs and identifies an adverse effect that is materially larger when interest rates are low. It suggests that these effects can be material for banks in some key advanced foreign economies.”
At bottom, banks have little leeway in a low-rate environment. They can only cut their funding costs so much. Theoretically they can charge negative deposit rates, but most have been reticent to do so. Instead, they’ve kept retail deposit rates at or near zero as yields decline.
The implications are straightforward: Unless banks are willing to charge negative deposit rates, their NIMs are likely to continue contracting as yields on earning assets reprice lower, which has certainly been the trend.
So Banks Look Cheap for a Reason
After years of pricing in many interest rate hikes on bank equities, investors have started to sober up and price in a greater likelihood of low rates remaining.
Based on headline ratios, bank and insurance company stocks look attractive. Traditionally, investors focus on price to tangible book ratios for banks, which are well below long-term averages.
But, as always, looks can be deceiving.
In this case, banks are trading so low because their profitability has plummeted since the financial crisis. Book multiples typically move in lockstep with return on equity (ROE), and material incremental ROE upside is unlikely if interest rates remain so low.
Should the current rate environment continue, a further erosion in profitability will occur as assets reprice while liability funding remains static. This will cause net interest margin compression and therefore lower returns on equity absent higher leverage.
Banks Are Vulnerable
It’s true that banks are well capitalized and have greater liquidity. Their capital ratios are high and loan losses are low. But lower profitability means lower earnings, and that will make it harder for banks to build capital during the next credit cycle.
An environment of low profitability can also cause banks to push the envelope and lower their lending standards or lengthen the duration of their assets to boost profitability. This could include holding longer duration whole loans on balance sheet, making incrementally riskier loans, or purchasing securities with more credit and/or duration risk.
To some degree, the firms themselves are to blame for their difficult straits. Many speculated that interest rates would rise and positioned their asset-liability exposure to benefit disproportionately from rising rates (and suffer more consequences if rates fell). They have given up current income in favor of floating rate over fixed-rate loans and kept the duration profiles of securities holdings very low.
One notable exception, however, is Wells Fargo, which put on a large interest rate swap over a year ago that converted its floating rate exposure to fixed-rate, thus locking in higher income if rates remained low at the cost of reduced flexibility if they rose. As it happened, rates barely budged and the bet paid off. But Wells Fargo was the exception.
An additional complication: With so many banks trading at valuations well below their tangible book value, some analysts are starting to call for stock buybacks. Should the current interest rate environment continue for a long time, these pressures will only intensify.
Headwinds for Insurance Companies.
Like banks, insurance companies attempt to earn a spread through an asset/liability framework. In the current interest rate environment, this has become more challenging.
MetLife CEO Steven Kandarian commented during the first quarter 2016 earnings callthat “Yen Whole Life sales were down 60% in the quarter. This sales decline was intentional, as it is difficult for this product to generate attractive returns and acceptable cash payback periods in a negative interest rate environment . . . Overall, top-line growth is a challenge in the current low-rate environment.” He continued, “to combat the pressures of growth from low rates in a weak macroeconomic environment, we must address our cost structure.”
But, like the banks, insurance companies can only slash expenses so much to offset the pressures of lower rates, and the longer those rates persist, the less likely the cuts will mitigate margin pressure over the long term.
These rate pressures are starting to be reflected in the price of insurance stocks, with MetLife’s stock price, for example, falling roughly 30% over the last year as of the end of June, to 66% of tangible book value.
Why Do Rates Keep Falling?
This question has been asked repeatedly since the financial crisis, but has only grown more confounding over the last year. Many investors assumed that as the labor market healed, inflation would begin to rise, the Fed would hike rates, and the curve would steepen in anticipation of additional rate hikes.
Despite a tightening labor market and even some traction in wage growth, rates have continued to fall and the yield curve has continued to flatten. Explanations for this range far and wide, from the puzzling drop in productivity, to aging demographics, to slowing global growth, to the undue influence of central banks in the markets.
Increased regulations, particularly Basel III, have also driven incremental demand as banks are required to hold a certain percentage of potential outflows in high-quality liquid assets. More recently, the drop in sovereign bond yields has been even more pronounced in the wake of Brexit-related uncertainty.
Investors are wondering how the low rates can be justified given these headwinds and whether the assumed “return to normalization” might just be a delusion.
Should the Fed Lend a Hand?
As a supervisor and regulator of banks, as well as a key driver of the low interest rate environment, the Fed has done a lot and could do more.
Quantitative easing (QE) programs have injected trillions of dollars of reserves into the system through the purchase of bonds. These reserves will remain until the bonds are sold or until the runoff/maturities cease to be reinvested.
The benefit of these reserves — and the offsetting deposit liabilities — is that liquidity appears to be much greater than it actually is. However, since the purchased bonds are no longer available in the market, a shortage of safe assets has developed, which forces would-be Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) buyers into riskier assets.
Allowing the size of the Fed’s balance sheet to be reduced through runoff would arguably steepen the yield curve while increasing the supply of safe assets. Deposit outflows would occur as a result of reserves leaving the system, but overall the steepening yield curve should provide a tailwind to banks while normalizing the environment.
One can’t help but see the irony in the Fed’s position. Early in the QE program, those opposed to it speculated that the Fed’s real objective was to recapitalize the banks. Years later, amid worries about asset scarcity while the curve is flattening, detractors argue that the Fed’s bloated balance sheet has artificially influenced asset levels and the supply/demand of government securities.
So What?
The longer interest rates stay so low, the more margin pressure banks and insurance companies will come under.
To some, the change in behavior of financial institutions in this low-rate environment poses additional risks with unknown effects. Others are much more sanguine and view the environment as an amazing opportunity to buy financials at bargain basement prices.
Both views are held by intelligent people, but only one will be right in the long term. The important thing to remember is that who is ultimately correct will have more to do with the future path of interest rates, which is reliably difficult to predict, than any other factor. Against that backdrop, investors should be asking what it is that they actually own when investing in financial firms: a business or a spread play.
This was written for CFA Institute https://www.cfainstitute.org/pages/index.aspx and first published on the Enterprising Investor https://blogs.cfainstitute.org/investor/

Random startup idea: Insurance policy for hiring expensive technical experts
An “insurance” program that provides super high quality experts in highly technical areas like advanced security, scaling services, refactoring up complex architectures and debugging major issues, etc.
Those experts might charge $500+ per hour on a freelance basis and most companies cannot afford to pay for them, and probably should avoid doing it if they can. But if they do need that expert to come in and fix a mess, why not pay into this as an insurance plan, where your premium is reduced every time you do not need an emergency expert to come in and get the job done.
I’m not sure if this exists but I think it makes sense as a business model and somebody should do it.

Children’s Health Insurance Program: If It Ain’t Broke. . .
In 1997, 1 in 7 children (or over 14 percent) were living without health insurance coverage in the United States. In response to this crisis, Senators Edward Kennedy (D-MA) and Orrin Hatch (R-UT) worked together on legislation to expand health coverage to our nation’s 10 million uninsured children. According to the New York Times, Senator Hatch said that “as a nation, as a society, we have the moral responsibility” to provide coverage for the most vulnerable children.
The initial bill formed the basis of a bipartisan child health package in the Senate Finance Committee that eventually worked its way through a Republican-led Congress and became part of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997. The final package was signed into law by President Bill Clinton on August 5, 1997, and resulted in the creation of what was initially known as the State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) — now known more simply as the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP).
Over CHIP’s 18 years, the program has undergone a few tense moments, such as when President George W. Bush vetoed CHIP’s reauthorization twice in 2007. However, in every instance, a bipartisan group of lawmakers have worked together to extend both the program and its funding. In fact, earlier this year, the program was extended through 2017 as part of the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act.
Just last month, the U.S. Census Bureau found that the uninsured rate for our nation’s children had dropped by more than half since CHIP’s inception. According to their data, the uninsured rate for children had declined to 6.2 percent in 2014. This is despite the fact that the Census Bureau also found that 21.1 percent of children live in poverty.
The fact is that, in partnership with Medicaid, CHIP works very well. Although it is rarely hyped, CHIP continues to have strong bipartisan support at the federal and state levels, including strong support from our nation’s governors, as it quietly goes about the business of efficiently providing health coverage to over 8 million children in low-income working families across the country. The program’s child-specific benefits and child-focused provider networks are created in recognition of the fact that kids have unique health and developmental needs.
Despite its success, CHIP’s future remains somewhat tenuous. During consideration of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) in 2009 and 2010, for example, there was some initial thought and some expressed support from a few important organizations, such as the American Hospital Association, for eliminating CHIP and moving the 8 million children that the program serves into the ACA’s Marketplace exchanges.
However, advocates for children, including First Focus, shared data and research with Congress that provided evidence that children would be left worse off in terms of coverage, affordability, benefits, access to care, provider network adequacy, and quality of care if CHIP were eliminated.
Consequently, the United States Senate moved to protect CHIP from proposals and efforts to eliminate it. Although some have suggested that Congress intended for CHIP to be temporarily extended through 2015, the fact is that the Senate made a very conscientious effort to keep CHIP strong and independent. There is no ambiguity whatsoever about this.
According to Senator Jay Rockefeller (D-WV), who authored the amendment that ensured CHIP was protected:
As health reform moves forward, we need to make sure children can keep their CHIP coverage and not be forced into untested private coverage.
Rockefeller added:
The Congressional Budget Office has been very clear that replacing CHIP with private health coverage will lead some children to lose their health coverage altogether, which is harmful and intolerable. Health care reform should improve the coverage children have — not take their coverage away.
I have spent my entire career working to protect children and other vulnerable populations, and will keep fighting to protect CHIP as health care reform goes to the Senate floor, and then moves to conference with the House of Representatives. We must do all we can to shield children from harm. Always.
And, as Senator Bob Casey (D-PA) explained on the Senate floor on November 18, 2009:
One of the reasons we are debating health care reform is to make sure we are doing everything possible to strengthen the Children’s Health Insurance Program and do not allow it to be weakened in any way.
One way to weaken it — and fortunately the Senate Finance Committee did not do this in their final bill — is to take a stand-alone, successful, effective Children’s Health Insurance Program and put it in the health insurance exchange. It may sound good — within one system — but I believe, and many others believe, it would be very bad. The Finance Committee, led by Senator Rocekfeller, worked very hard to make it possible to keep the Children’s Health Insurance Program as a separate stand-alone program.
Casey went on to describe how children would be left worse off in terms of cost-sharing protections, benefits, and even coverage, if CHIP were eliminated. As he said:
By one estimate, in Pennsylvania alone, this means that nearly 100,000 children who currently have insurance coverage would lose it. . . .
This latter concern is due to what is described as the “family glitch” in the ACA, which imposes an affordability test that would cause an estimated 1–2 million children currently covered by CHIP to lose coverage altogether because they would be unable to access tax credits through the ACA and would find coverage to be unaffordable.
“Comparison of Benefits and Cost Sharing in Children’s Health Insurance Programs to Qualified Health Plans,” Wakely Consulting Group, July 2014
Six years later and after the implementation of the ACA, the evidence continues to show that CHIP has much lower cost-sharing, more comprehensive child-focused benefits, and stronger child-centered provider networks than coverage offered through employer-sponsored insurance (ESI) or through the Marketplace exchanges.
And yet, there continue to be some that contend it would be preferable for CHIP to be abolished. One argument is that eliminating CHIP would “simplify” coverage. According to the Bipartisan Policy Center (BPC), ending CHIP and moving kids to exchange plans would serve “to unify families and prevent churning in eligibility between programs and policies.”
But, is that what parents want and desire? Are parents asking to move their children out of CHIP and into their own plan on the Marketplace exchanges?
Based on 14 focus group discussions conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation’s (KFF) Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, the answer is a resounding “no”.
Since parents with children covered by CHIP are working families living “on tight budgets,” the focus group members said that “[a]ffordability was a primary concern followed by broad coverage.” And, due to the fact that CHIP is far more affordable than either ESI or Marketplace coverage that the parents had, parents expressed a strong interest in maintaining CHIP coverage for their children.
As KFF’s Robin Rudowitz says, “most of those with children in CHIP noted lower costs far outweighed any issues with having children in separate plans.”
She adds:
Most parents with children in CHIP indicated that they had few difficulties managing their children’s coverage separately from their own, and several indicated that they found CHIP coverage to be much less complex and burdensome than their own private plans because there were fewer bills to track compared to private coverage.
As for BPC’s argument that it is desirable for a family to be enrolled all under one plan, the Kaiser focus group parents indicated the opposite was true. Rudowitz explains:
. . .for most families, the providers used by their children (pediatricians and other specialists) were not the same as those used by the parents. In addition, nearly all of the participants also indicated that they found their plans to be very expensive and would be willing to have their children in separate coverage if it meant they would have lower costs and could maintain similar benefits and providers. A number of parents said that they would gladly put up with a few headaches or hassle of dealing with separate plans for their children to save money.
Parents recognize that children have unique health care needs and different providers than they do. And since CHIP is far more affordable and has better benefits than coverage offered in ESI and Marketplace plans, Rudowitz concludes:
Coverage under the same plan with their children was not a priority for parents. Parents with children in private coverage were willing to have children in a separate plan if it would lower the costs they faced. Parents with children in CHIP did not want children in their private coverage (generally due to costs).
If coverage were comparable, parents and child advocates might agree to eliminate CHIP and to move kids into Marketplace coverage. To do so, BPC recommends:
Eliminating gaps in coverage by resolving issues related to the ACA, such as the so-called “family glitch.”
Ensuring that differences in benefits and out-of-pocket costs in current employer-sponsored or exchange plans do not result in the loss of important benefits or in high cost-sharing for lower income children and their families.
However, the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission (MACPAC) recently presented estimates from the Urban Institute that, even if Congress attempted to fix the “family glitch,” coverage in the ACA would still be unaffordable to low-income families. Consequently, even if the “family glitch” were fixed, 500,000 to 1.1 million children would still lose coverage if CHIP was eliminated.
Therefore, to protect children from being left worse off, Congress would have to enact legislation that would improve the ACA in a number of ways, including significantly reducing out-of-pocket costs for children, expanding pediatric benefits, improving pediatric and safety net provider networks, and enhancing quality and access to care standards at a substantial cost. The idea would be to raise ACA coverage to the CHIP standard.

This creates a number of ironies. For one, the BPC argument urges the elimination of CHIP in order to simplify coverage for families even though “[p]arents of children in CHIP did not want children in their private coverage. . . .” Most parents want what is best for their children, and CHIP is far superior to alternative coverage options.
In addition, if the argument is to “simplify” coverage without leaving children worse off, an incredibly complex piece of legislation would need to be enacted that would radically overhaul pediatric coverage in both ESI and Marketplace exchange plans — a nearly impossible task or, put another way, the exact opposite of simple.
And that leads to the ultimate irony, which is that proponents of the elimination of CHIP are pushing for changes that would radically overhaul other forms of insurance to be more like . . . CHIP.
This begs the question: why end CHIP to recreate it? And, if the concern is about churning between policies as family income fluctuates, wouldn’t it be far easier to just allow CHIP to be an option in the Marketplace exchanges? That would actually be simple and a way kids could keep their child-centered policies and provider networks, even when their parents’ income changes.
The fact is that CHIP works — and does so very well. In a recent 2014 Satisfaction Survey of Iowa parents whose children were enrolled in “hawk-i” (Iowa’s CHIP program), an overwhelming 93.7 percent expressed satisfaction with the care received and less than one percent (or 0.7 percent) expressed dissatisfaction with the care their children received.
Due to this success, CHIP is wildly popular. Although one pollster once joked that Americans are so disillusioned with politics right now that 25 percent oppose just about anything, an American Viewpoint poll last year found that voters strongly supported extending CHIP by a wide 74–14 percent margin.
As a result, it is hard to imagine a Republican-led Congress choosing to repeal CHIP, particularly when the American people overwhelmingly support it, a Republican-led Congress initially created it, and Republican governors have embraced it. And, it is harder to imagine a Republican-led Congress choosing to spend billions of dollars in order to move those kids into ACA exchanges, when not a single Republican voted for Obamacare’s exchanges.
Meanwhile, for Democrats, it is hard to imagine that they would support elimination of a program that was created under President Bill Clinton, extended under President Barack Obama in 2009, and successfully implemented in a successful manner by Democratic and Republican governors across the country. CHIP has, in partnership with Medicaid, cut the uninsured rate by more than half since its inception and has been a popular achievement as to how public policy can work well for children and families.
If nothing else, one would hope that Congress could agree on one simple thing: if it ain’t broke, don’t fix it.
And yet, saving CHIP from running out of money requires, when a new president takes office and a new Congress is seated in 2017, that they make the program’s extension an urgent order of business. Such action will require an “act of Congress,” and we all know that very phrase is used often to describe something that is nearly impossible to get accomplished.
The goal must continue to be focused on keeping protecting the coverage that has been working well for kids and ensuring that children are not left worse off as health system transformations advance. Therefore, advocates for children and their health care will need to redouble their efforts to ensure that CHIP is extended once again. With 94 percent of our nation’s children now having health coverage and with many of them owing this achievement to CHIP, now is not the time to reverse course.

Insurance could help Latin America break the link between extreme weather and extreme poverty
Devastating floods in Latin America have increased significantly because of climate change, plunging families deeper into poverty. Image: REUTERS/Guadalupe Pardo
Martyn Parker, Chairman, Global Partnerships, Swiss Re, UK
This article is part of the World Economic Forum on Latin America 2017
2016 was the hottest year on record. The polar icecaps are visibly melting at an alarming pace and sea levels are starting to rise, threatening major coastal cities around the world. Resilience is on everybody’s mind and many governments are actively thinking about how to deliver on commitments made at the UN COP21 Paris conference.
Insurance and a proactive, holistic risk management approach are essential tools for cities and governments to protect and provide opportunity for their citizens. As such, resilience strategies cannot address climate change alone — factors like the wealth gap, sustainable green growth and sustainable infrastructure development must also be addressed.
Latin America is one of the world’s most urban continents with 80% of its population living in cities and almost one fifth of these in shanty towns. Devastating flood and drought events have increased significantly because of climate change. This will deepen the vulnerabilities already apparent in critical infrastructure and the economy and, in turn, undermine social stability in particularly risk-exposed urban settlements in Latin America.
We need look no further than the torrential rains causing suffering for many in Peru. With flash floods and mudslides washing away critical roads and bridges, people are stranded and cut off from essential services. Unable to enter their homes or maintain their livelihoods, families sink further into poverty.

Argentina, like Peru, has increasingly suffered from the effects of climate change in the form of floods. Today, one in three people live in areas highly exposed to flooding — that’s more than 14 million people across the country. Furthermore, 15 of the top 25 industrial parks in Argentina are located in flood-prone areas.
Besides the threat posed to the lives and health of the population, the estimated economic damage is also severe, amounting to about 0.15% of its GDP linked to flood-related events alone. While this may seem like a small number, it adds up to a total economic loss of around $700 million a year.
Santa Fe, in the north-east of Argentina, has been hard hit because of its situation near the junction of two of South America’s major waterways: the Paraná and Salado rivers. Severe floods in 2003 and 2007 — and this year as well — have highlighted the city’s vulnerability, both in terms of physical devastation and the tremendous impact felt by its poorer communities.
In order to try and reduce future consequences and help the city and its people get back on their feet more quickly, Santa Fe has become a member of the 100 Resilient Cities initiative and has recently appointed a city resilience officer. As part of its resilience strategy Santa Fe has joined forces with provincial and national government agencies to improve the maintenance of its water management system. The city is also working hard to improve communication, education and community awareness around risk prevention. Importantly, public sector officials in Santa Fe have recognized that resilience planning can also help to reduce poverty and income inequality.
Have you read?
Our critical infrastructure is more vulnerable than ever. It doesn’t have to be that way
These extreme weather events show that our climate is in ‘uncharted territory’
Why cities are outpacing countries in the race to curb climate change
Disasters disproportionately affect low-income populations and, as a recent Inter-American Development Bank study notes, risk management directly improves the resilience of welfare programmes and social safety. This encourages cities like Santa Fe to take on both disaster protection and the wealth gap.
In a recent study conducted by Swiss Re, Flood Risk in Argentina, a majority of shop owners interviewed said they consider flood insurance, combined with private savings and governmental subsidies, as a valuable means to overcome the financial burdens brought by a flood event. Yet, up to now, there has been no meaningful flood insurance product available for small and medium businesses in Argentina.
The protection gap for floods around the world is already large and continues to grow. With the technological advances, knowledge and tools available to the insurance industry today, the creation of a private flood insurance market is a resilience opportunity. Recent examples where governments in other parts of the world have taken steps to improve flood resilience are Flood Re in the UK and the revamped National Flood Insurance Program in the US.
Essentially, there is a strong business case for governments and cities in Latin and Central America and beyond to consider insurance as a tool in their efforts to effectively improve disaster and climate resilience. Collaboration is the most effective way to drive our common effort to shape a more resilient world and break the nexus between extreme weather and extreme poverty.
Subscribe for updates
A weekly update of what’s on the Global Agenda
Originally published at www.weforum.org.

The Insurance Question I’m Still Not Sure I’ve Answered Correctly
Cedar Rapids
When Ben suggested we get life insurance, I balked. Couldn’t we just take the money we would spend on a policy and save it, instead of paying a monthly fee to a company for an eventual, theoretical payout we may never — hopefully will never — need?
Ben won the argument, although since that happened more than six months ago now, I honestly can’t remember the conversation-ending logic. Being responsible parents entered into it, sure. There must have been something else too though. Something that broke through my knee-jerk resistance. Maybe being $30 poorer each month has made me stupider, because I cannot recall.
In any event, I agreed to go Term, not Whole, for coverage until the kid(s) hit roughly eighteen. Because I am, sigh, a Millennial, I turned to the Internets first and found Efinancial, a site that sifts through various policies and hooks you up with the best option for you.
A nice man named Bryan arranged for an in-home health check up by a medical examiner. Although he was good about reminding me in advance, and although I set up various reminders for myself via Google calendars, I still managed to be caught off-guard when the doorbell rang early one weekday morning. The toddler was half-dressed, the husband barely showered, and I didn’t have even have a bra on yet.
I apologized profusely to everyone for the chaotic state of things: the toddler, the husband, and the medical examiner, who turned out to be a Hasidic Jewish man from deepest Brooklyn. Needless to say, my blood pressure was a lot higher when he first took it than it was when he took it again an hour later. (“I must have a calming effect on you,” he said.)
The examiner administered a battery of tests, the priorities of which seemed pretty bizarre. He asked me if I smoked over and over again but never asked if I go to the gym. He wanted to know what I weighed but showed no curiosity about what I eat.
So it goes. My blood, blood pressure, weight and I all passed the test(s) and qualified for relatively affordable Term Life Insurance from TransAmerica: $30 a month for a 15 year plan valued at $850,000.
Frankly, the whole thing still feels like kind of a racket to me, and I don’t have a lot of confidence that I’ve made the best decision. $30 a month has not bought me peace of mind. But I suppose it is comforting to know that if something should happen to me, Ben, as a widower and single parent of two, won’t have to add immediate destitution to his list of concerns.
How have you approached, or solved, this problem?

A Call to Action for Insurance Providers
Today, I am sharing the below letter with the leadership of all major insurance companies and CMS urging them to take action on implementing the recommendations outlined in the Surgeon General’s Report on Alcohol, Drugs and Health, which was released last week.
We have waited far too long for insurers to take action, and too many lives have been lost as a result. I am calling on America’s health insurance companies and CMS to share their action plans on January 24th in Washington, DC, as part of my event, “The New Frontier of Mental Health and Addiction.” This is insurers’ moment to demonstrate commitment to putting their customers’ health needs first, and I challenge them to seize this opportunity to solve one of the nation’s most critical public health issues.
—
To the nation’s leading insurance providers,
In the introduction to the first-ever Surgeon General’s Report on Alcohol, Drugs, and Health, released in November, the Surgeon General explains that the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA) and the Affordable Care Act incentivize health care organizations to integrate substance use disorder treatment with general health care. The report goes on to state that “many questions remain, but those questions are no longer whether but how this much-needed integration will occur.” As the nation’s leading insurance providers, you have a tremendous opportunity — and obligation — before you to demonstrate your commitment to better health for all of the people you serve.
Below are five things that you can do immediately to ensure the objectives of this report, which include saving many lives from accidental overdose, are realized.
1 Eliminate the onerous medical management practices responsible for inadequate, ineffective treatment of addiction. MHPAEA requires that the financial requirements and treatment limitations imposed by most health plans and insurers for substance use disorders be no more restrictive than the financial requirements and treatment limitations they impose for medical and surgical conditions. Put simply, it’s the law. Don’t wait for your customers to file a complaint after their rights have been violated. Do the right thing, and proactively ensure that your plans are in compliance with the law. This includes, but is not limited to, eliminating managed care restrictions on reimbursement for substance use disorder treatment in inpatient settings, such as limitations on length of residential rehabilitation stays.
2 Immediately ensure that all plans cover and reimburse for well-supported medication assisted treatment (MAT) including buprenorphine, buprenorphine-naloxone, buprenorphine-hydrochloride, methadone, naltrexone, acamprosate, and disulfiram at rates equal to coverage for medications used to treat other forms of chronic illness. These medications, especially when combined with counseling and other behavior therapies, have been repeatedly proven to be highly effective treatment options for individuals with alcohol and substance use disorders. Studies continue to demonstrate the efficacy of MAT at reducing illicit drug use and overdose deaths, improving retention in treatment, and reducing HIV transmission. This includes, but is not limited to, the immediate elimination of ‘fail first’ programs, lifetime medication limits, duration limits, step therapy requirements and preauthorization. I applaud Cigna for its decision to eliminate preauthorization, and urge all insurers to follow suit.
3 Incentivize greater coordination of care. The Surgeon General’s report clearly states: “Effective integration of prevention, treatment and recovery services across health care systems is key to addressing substance misuse and its consequences and it represents the most promising way to improve access to and quality of treatment.” Although 45 percent of patients seeking treatment for substance use disorders have a co-occurring mental disorder, most addiction treatment programs are not part of, or even affiliated with, mental or physical health care organizations. Similarly, most general health care organizations — even teaching hospitals — do not provide screening, diagnosis, or treatment for substance use disorders. This separation of substance use disorder treatment from the rest of health care contributes to the lack of understanding of the medical nature of these illnesses and slow adoption of evidence-based treatments. By incentivizing more coordinated care, you have an opportunity to decrease overall costs and increase positive health outcomes.
4 Adequately disclose processes for ensuring parity compliance. When a provider is certain that a service is covered by a health plan, they are more likely to receive training and offer an innovative and effective new treatment. If they are not sure, they may choose not to receive training because they may not receive reimbursement for the service. Insurers should issue descriptions of the process used to develop or select the medical necessity criteria for mental health and substance use benefits along with the process used to develop the medical necessity criteria for medical and surgical benefits; and identify all non-quantitative treatment limitations (NQTLs) that are applied to mental health and substance use disorder benefits and all NQTLs that are applied to medical and surgical benefits.
5 Promote screening and work with communities to implement prevention interventions. Evidence-based prevention interventions, carried out before the need for treatment, are critical because they can delay early use and stop the progression from use to problematic use or substance use disorder, all of which are associated with costly individual, social and public health consequences. Prevention can markedly reduce the burden of disease and related costs, and there is strong scientific evidence supporting the effectiveness of prevention programs and policies. Insurance companies must ensure that providers understand the research-based recommendations for prescribing opioids, and do your part to hold them accountable. Aetna sends a letter to doctors prescribing high levels of opiates to patients, and Anthem requires patients who “doctor shop” to receive prescriptions at only one pharmacy, so that pharmacists will notice multiple prescriptions. Upfront investments and reimbursements for evidence-based prevention interventions will reduce both direct and indirect costs related to crime, health and lost productivity.
I invite you to present your action plans at an event I am holding on Tuesday, January 24, 2017 from 11am-1pm in The Kennedy Caucus Room in Washington, D.C. The gathering, “The New Frontier for Mental Health and Addiction,” will provide a bold plan for all members of Congress, regardless of party or committee, to take action on parity enforcement and achieve true equality for the millions of Americans living with the disease of addiction. I urge you to be part of this event, and be part of the solution desperately needed by millions of our fellow citizens.
By taking these steps to comply with the law and achieve the true promise of parity, you can play a pivotal role in solving one of the nation’s most pressing public health crises.
Sincerely,
Patrick J. Kennedy


On-Demand Insurance Through the DroneDeploy App Market
Verifly and DroneDeploy Partnership Gives Drone Operators Easy Access to Pay-Per-Use Liability Coverage
As any commercial drone pilot knows, liability insurance is a must if you’re running a serious, professional operation. Sure, carrying a million-dollar insurance policy isn’t as exciting as, say, wowing a new client with a 3D model of their construction site, but it’s just as critical a part of doing business. As we’ve written about before, not only does an adequate insurance policy protect you and your commercial drone business from legal liability should an accident happen, but more to the point, most clients require proof of liability insurance before ever letting a drone take off at their site.
We’re always on the lookout for ways to help drone pilots run their businesses more efficiently, which is why we want to make sure you know about our partnership with Verifly, which provides on-demand drone liability insurance from as little as $10 per hour.

Terry Power of Tampa Bay Sky Cam says he started using Verifly because he wanted a simple, easy way to protect himself and his corporate clients.
“Verifly makes it easy for drone operators. When you’re doing work around properties that cost literally millions of dollars, it would be reckless not to protect yourself and your clients. Verifly gives me and my clients the peace of mind that we need when we’re engaged for a job.” — Terry Power, Tampa Bay Sky Cam
With Verifly’s mobile app, all you have to do is confirm your location and select your flight area, and you are given a real-time price quote. Enter your email and credit card and presto! — a one-million-dollar liability policy for the duration of your flight.
Advantages of Pay-Per-Use Insurance
Of course, drone operators can opt for more traditional, long-term liability policies, but for many small drone service businesses, there are some distinct advantages to choosing pay-per-use insurance.

No large upfront expense: For small drone businesses, a pay-per-use liability policy is often the most cost effective option. Annual drone insurance policies cost upwards of a thousand dollars per year. Unless you are out flying every day, it can be difficult to justify this price tag. A pay-per-use policy allows you to buy coverage only when you need it and skip the expense when you don’t.
Bill cost of insurance to client: Because pay-per-use insurance policies last only for the duration of the flight, it’s easy to tie the expense to a particular job. Many drone providers take this opportunity to bill the cost of insurance to the client. After all, liability insurance is as much for the benefit of the client as it is for the drone pilot.
No application process: Who wants to fill out those multi-page PDFs that are required by traditional liability insurance policies? With Verifly’s pay-per-use option, everyone is instantly approved. No waiting, no fuss.
Insure any drone up to 15lbs: Pay-per-use policies are not tied to a specific drone, which is great for operators who own multiple rigs. (Maybe you just got a new drone under the tree this Christmas?) Verifly even allows you to operate more than one drone within a single policy period, provided you don’t operate more than one at a time.
Add client name to a policy: Many clients require drone service providers to list their company as “additionally insured” on a liability policy. This means that, in the event a drone flight leads to an injury or property claim against the client company, that claim will be covered under the drone provider’s policy. With an annual policy, this requires contacting the insurance company and waiting, sometimes a few days, for a response. Verifly users, on the other hand, can simply add a client’s name to each policy right in the app.

A Note About Liability Insurance
It is important to point out that liability insurance covers damage caused to a third party by a drone operation. This includes bodily injury, as well as property damage. It does not, however, cover damage to the drone itself. For this, you will need hull insurance. Currently, Verifly’s policies do not include hull insurance, so if this is a current need for your company, you will have to purchase it separately. That being said, Verifly tell us that, due to customer interest, they are investigating the possibility of adding hull insurance to their portfolio in the future.
Verifly and DroneDeploy Partner for a Seamless Insurance Process
To make a super simple insurance process even easier, Verifly is now integrated into DroneDeploy’s App Market. This means that if you link Verifly to your DroneDeploy account, you can initiate coverage without ever leaving your dashboard. Simply select your planned flight, perform your safety check and add Verifly insurance with the click of a few buttons. It’s that simple.
DroneDeploy users who have already covered their flights with Verifly will be happy to hear about several new features available with the most recent release.
Universal coverage — authorized pilots can get insurance near airports, heliports and stadiums
Up to $2.5M limit
1,4, and 8-hour policies
Up to 1/2 mile coverage area
Get Started with Drone Deploy
Want to learn how DroneDeploy can help your business? Visit www.dronedeploy.com to start your free trial or request a consultation with one of our team members. The DroneDeploy mobile application is available for free download for both iOS and Android devices.

Let’s Buy Insurance to Cover the Deductible on Our Health Insurance
For every problem, there’s a product.
The Simpsons (and their health insurance)
My current Bronze health insurance plan includes a $245.69 monthly premium (up from $219.38 in 2015), a $5,250 deductible, and a $6,100 out-of-pocket maximum.
As I wrote during last year’s Open Enrollment:
In other words, I’m paying $2,948.28 over the course of the year for the privilege of only having to pay $6,100 towards any medical costs.
Open Enrollment Has Started, and My Options Are Worse This Year
We’re three days into the Affordable Care Act Open Enrollment, and I am already unhappy with my choices.medium.com
But as the saying goes: for every problem, there’s a product. (I just made up that saying, but I think we can all agree it should be real.)
The New York Times reports that more and more Americans are buying insurance to cover the deductible on their insurance. (Take a minute and sit with that idea. Think about what it means.) Buy a critical illness insurance policy, for example, and you’ll pay a little every month—but they’ll help cover your health insurance deductible if you become critically ill.
The product, known as critical illness insurance, promises to pay a lump sum, anywhere from $5,000 to $100,000, after someone receives some sort of dreaded diagnosis, like cancer, a heart attack or a stroke. And the coverage is not terribly expensive; if you are in your 40s, it might cost $25 to $50 a month.
Insurance for Critical Illness May Add Security, but at a Cost
So it's not surprising that more people - both employees and people in the individual market - are buying critical…www.nytimes.com
As with nearly everything else health-insurance-related, these critical insurance plans are designed to benefit both you and your employer:
“Quite honestly, these high-deductible plans are a source of initial employee stress,” said Barry Schilmeister, a principal in the health and benefits business at Mercer, a human resources consulting firm. “And it seems as though these plans are helping a certain group of employees feel a little bit better about signing up for a plan that has a high deductible, at least in certain cases where the employee is afraid they will have a large out-of-pocket cost in those kinds of not-frequent situations.”
I cannot quote the entire article here, so I hope you’ll take a few minutes to read the whole thing. Here are a few of the highlights:
Around 1.2 million critical illness policies were sold in 2014.
If you are more worried about expensive accidents (like broken bones) than you are about critical illness, there are other supplemental insurance policies to help you cover those potential expenses. After all, you wouldn’t want one insurance policy to provide for every possible healthcare need, right? That would be a ridiculous idea.
Yes, critical illness insurance will look for ways to deny your claim, such as “your cancer isn’t large enough.” (SERIOUSLY. PLEASE READ THE ENTIRE NYT PIECE.)
I’ll end with a NYT quote from Jackson Williams, the Consumer Liaison Representative of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners:
“What concerns me is that these products are being marketed as being helpful to people’s personal finances in the event they have some sort of illness and need to pay their outsized deductible. But I would vehemently disagree that these products are very good at addressing that problem.”
Have any Billfolders purchased critical illness insurance or a similar supplementary insurance policy? How much are you paying every month, and how much of your deductible will it cover? If you had the option to purchase supplementary insurance and chose not to, what were the factors involved in that decision?

I’m also one of the 20 million who wouldn’t have health insurance without the ACA.

Medical Debt image credit: Stockphoto
Blondie and the (Medical Coding and Billing Error) Beast, Part 2: Health Insurance Appeal
Over the course of the past several weeks, I have been helping my friend investigate the root cause of a health insurance claim denial for her daughter’s orthopedic surgery — which has resulted in more than 50 subsequent claim denials and more than $50,000 in undue medical debt for the family — and prepare the external review appeal that is the last bastion before legal action.
In Part 1 of this odyssey, I explored the initial findings regarding the medical coding and billing errors that contributed to the claims denial. In this, Part 2, I am providing the complete appeal letter, with providers and insurers de-identified. Developing this appeal letter was eye-opening, exposing systemic process weaknesses and lack of empathy — and limited comprehension — about the implications of errors on the very people healthcare exists to serve.
The appeal letter, alone, is over 1500 words long. It is full of clinical jargon, clinical diagnosis protocols, diagnosis codes, procedure codes, and healthcare policy mandate timelines. The complete appeal package contained more than 30 pages of supplemental material that had to be requested and curated from the patient’s electronic and paper medical records, the Explanation of Benefits from the insurers, call logs from provider practice management and registration systems, and notes from the slew of conversations with billing and office managers across each of the entities referenced.
This single letter references 6 healthcare providers and 3 insurers, all of whom are party in some way to the cause of the claim denial. Each one of those providers should have prepared their own appeal to the claim denials resulting from their services. Each one could have coordinated with the surgical practice to align the language to the originating claim and appeal. But only the first provider filed an appeal — and it was filed by their billing department, without providing the requested supporting documentation. The only appeal that was filed was half-assed. No other providers coordinated to correct. All 6 providers in this case allowed the full financial responsibility for a medically necessary covered service to fall onto the family’s shoulders.
Shame on them all. And shame on us, as an industry, for not just allowing this process to happen — but for accepting it as inevitable, breaking family’s backs behind the scenes while meeting “quality” and “value” metrics on paper.
Are you prepared to research and respond like this, if it happened to you?

This could easily happen to you, or someone you love. It happens thousands of times each day, to people who have done nothing but receive covered healthcare services from in-network healthcare providers while diligently paying their health insurance premiums.
With all the detail provided in this appeal, this claim — and all subsequent claims resulting from this injury — may not be paid. And even if the claim IS paid, the medical debt incurred may have already been sold (a process hilariously and tragically detailed by John Oliver, here) and this family (and their credit ratings) may be haunted by “zombie debt” for the next decade.
When you read the below (TL;DR — we show how the definition of “medical necessity” that insurer X provides as the reason for claim denial, line-by-line, was met, with supporting documentation from the records), imagine you are facing this fight.
To Whom It May Concern,
I am writing this letter on behalf of my dependent daughter, Blondie, who is 17 years old and was diagnosed with a hip labrum tear after a high school sports-related injury which occurred on 1/17/2015. This letter serves as our formal appeal with respect to claim 123456789 , filed by provider X, for CPT code 29916 — hip arthroscopy with labral repair, which was denied by insurer X. on March 17, 2016, as “investigational and not medically necessary”. Please be advised that this surgery was recommended by orthopedic specialists after 12 months of physical therapy were unsuccessful in resolving Blondie’s symptoms. Additionally, X-ray series were conducted after months of conservative treatment. The medical findings from the X-rays indicated that Blondie sustained a labrum tear with pincer impingement and femoroacetabular impingement syndrome also present.
Pursuant to the specific terms of the denial letter, attached to this appeal document as Exhibit “A”, I will reference each requirement for medical necessity separately, with references attached for review.
1. From Exhibit “A”, surgery claim denial: “Your request tells us that you have hip pain. We do not see that you have tried other treatments for at least six months without success.”
a. Patient was covered under insurer Y at the time of the injury on 1/17/2015, and throughout initial 12 months of physical therapy at provider Y.
b. Exhibit “B” contains initial injury report from school insurance form, confirming injury on 1/17/2015, signed by school secretary on 2/19/2015.
c. Exhibit “C” contains final report of MRI of right hip without contrast, performed by provider Z with date of service 2/12/2015. Findings indicated that the superior portion of the acetabular labrum is avulsed.
d. Exhibit “D” contains the clinical encounter record of the initial orthopedic consult with provider A with date of service 2/25/2015 detailing chief complaints and referring the patient to physical therapy. Assessment/Plan section of the clinical encounter record provides the following ICD-9 diagnosis codes (ICD-10 was not required until October 2015):
i. 719.45 — Hip joint pain
ii. 719.25 — Villonodular synovitis involving hip
iii. 840.8 — Labral tear
1. This was erroneously coded in the electronic medical records (EMR) system and constitutes a medical error that could not have been known to the patient. ICD-9 code 840.8 is a shoulder labral tear or other sprain or strain of the fascia. The MRI report and all plan of care documentation supports a hip labrum tear.
2. Exhibit “E” contains correct ICD-9 code for hip labrum tear (843.9), as recorded manually by provider A on date of service 2/25/2015.
e. Exhibit “F” contains encounter documentation from physical therapy provider Y with Plan of Care and Progress Notes for date of service 4/30/2015. This Plan of Care indicates hip injury and related gait instability recovery progress, and is representative of each of the visits patient had from February 2015 through January 2016.
f. Exhibit “G” contains account statement with dates of service of each physical therapy visit by patient to provider Y with dates of services between February 2015 and April 2016, at which point the insurer X claim denial prohibited further physical therapy.
i. Patient pursued conservative physical therapy for at least six months for the hip injury treatment, meeting the stated requirement for medical necessity for the surgery.
2. From Exhibit “A”, surgery claim denial: “Also, this surgery only works when there is abnormal contact between the bones in the hip (femoroacetabular impingement syndrome). Your request does not tell us that X-rays show that you have this problem.”
a. Exhibit “H” includes clinical encounter record of office visit to provider B with date of service 1/12/2016 which references results of X-ray imaging studies on the same date of service of 1/12/2016.
i. Under section, “Physical Exam”: “Positive hip impingement test.”
ii. Under section, “Imaging/Diagnostic Studies”, “Hip/Pelvis Imaging”, results reflect: “3 views of the right hip and pelvis were obtained on 1/12/2016 reveals a small pincer lesion on the right side with a small acetabular cyst on anterior wall. Mild cam deformity of the femoral head and neck.”
iii. Under section, “Plan”: “The patient has a labral tear most likely caused by hip flexion injury that occurred in early 2015 with possible underlying femoroacetabular impingement.”
1. “She is unable to do his (sic) daily activities such as bending kneeling squatting, prolonged standing or walking, carrying a load etc. She has essentially exhausted non-operative treatment.”
b. Exhibit “I” includes the surgery coding sheet with date of service 1/22/2016, with place of service at provider C, signed by First Assistant “Ryan” that records, via handwritten note beneath the ICD/CPT crosswalk section, “FAI” under the ICD and “psoas tendon release” under the CPT section.
3. From Exhibit “A”, surgery claim denial: “Medical studies show that this surgery does not work well when there are changes of wear (osteoarthritis) in the hip joint. Your request does not tell us that your hip joint has little or no signs of wear (Tonnis grade 1 or less).”
a. Three radiological diagnostic imaging series, including an MRI and two X-ray series, were obtained in the time period from the injury on 1/17/2015 through the surgery on 1/22/2016, with the final results recorded in the clinical encounter documents contained as references herein. The presence or absence of osteoarthritis was not explicitly noted in any of these diagnostic imaging reports; however, the absence of diagnostic evidence of osteoarthritis was recorded.
i. Exhibit “C”, the original MRI of the injury detailed above with date of service of 2/12/2015, recorded, “Articular cartilage is intact.”
b. Exhibit “E”, the orthopedic office visit encounter document detailed above with date of service of 2/25/2015, did not include ICD-9 code 715.9 for osteoarthritis in the diagnosis codes that were sent to the medical coding department to inform billing.
c. Exhibit “H”, the orthopedic office visit encounter document detailed above with date of service of 1/12/2016, records physical examination results and the results of an X-ray imaging series of 3 hip and pelvis views with a date of service of 1/12/2016.
i. Per Altman et al clinical guidelines for determination of osteoarthritis, established in 1991, patient did not meet the criteria for a determination of osteoarthritis per the results of the physical exam performed, with scores recorded in section “Physical Exam” as follows: “60 flexion, 45 internal rotation, 70 external rotation”.
ii. Absence of clinical signs of osteoarthritis recorded under section, “Physical Exam”: “No flexion contracture. No pain with range of motion exam. No pain with resisted hip flexion…No edema.”
Clearly, the guidelines for medical necessity to surgically repair the torn hip labrum, pincer and FAI impingements on this pediatric patient, as explicitly defined in the internal appeal denial contained in Exhibit “A”, were met. The patient could not have been aware of any medical coding or reimbursement-related procedural errors committed by the provider(s) in submitting claims detail and any required attachments or supporting documentation to insurer X. Also, the patient was not party to the content of the internal appeal document or execution of the internal appeal process that was initially filed by provider X.
The denial of this surgical claim caused subsequent denials for claims from the outpatient surgical facility, the anesthesiologist, and the physical therapist. The denial of this claim has resulted in an interruption of follow-up medical care for the patient. And, the denial of this claim has interfered with the coordination of benefits that should have occurred between insurer X and insurer Z, the school’s insurer, as the injury occurred on school grounds during a school-sanctioned activity.
As a result, we respectfully request that you reverse your denial and honor all past, present and future medical treatment as it relates to the injury as prescribed throughout this formal appeal. Evidence provided supports that proper conservative care was in fact administered for this patient for nearly a year post injury. Additionally, the proper diagnostic procedures were followed as prescribed by medical physicians. Finally, the diagnosis is consistent with the treatment and ultimate recommendation for surgery. At no time would the patient nor her family be aware of the communication and to some degree improper coding between the medical providers and the insurance carrier. This communication breakdown appears to have been further exacerbated by the fact that there was a change in insurance providers well after the course of conservative care had been completed. Finally, there is verbal evidence to support that a representative from provider X’s office did in fact make contact with insurer X on January 18, 2016 requesting authorization for this surgery. According to provider X, there was no requirement for prior authorization as it relates to this particular surgical procedure. This information was ultimately shared with the patient’s family through the course of preparing this appeal and not at the time of request.
We have included all supporting documentation for your review. Thank you for your prompt attention to this matter.

Imagine this were your family. Who would help you? What, exactly, would you do? Have you ever asked your doctor what their process is to appeal initial claim denials, and then to help patients with subsequent appeals? If you’re a provider, have you ever gone through the claim appeal process, end-to-end, from the patient’s perspective?
This isn’t patient-centric. This isn’t value. This isn’t accountable care. This is, quite literally, passing the buck. It’s tragic, it’s shameful — and it’s standard US healthcare practice.
Stay tuned for Part 3: the decision.

A Life Extension Insurance Policy
🤔 There’s one policy missing…
I’m on a flight home. It’s a red-eye. I’m exhausted and want to sleep. The woman beside me starts talking as we are taxiing. She starts telling me about her job and how she almost missed the flight and so on. I’m being polite, trying to listen. But all I’m thinking is ‘I want to sleep’. I say nothing, thinking that’ll end the conversation but nope, she says, “So what do you do?”
Without hesitation I reply, “I’m a life insurance salesman”. Thinking to myself ‘how clever was that? That’ll shut down the discussion’, right? Who wants to talk about life insurance while taxiing on a runway? But no luck. She eyes me up and down and says, “you’re no insurance salesman.”
I hesitate briefly and reply, “Ok, you’re right, I’m a life-extension insurance salesman”.
“A what ?”she says.
“life-extension insurance salesman — I teach self-defense”.
“OMG, I always wanted to learn self-defense!” She exclaims, animated like we were going to do her first lesson in-flight.
I looked at her and said, “No you didn’t. People who really want to do things, do them. If you really wanted to learn self-defense you’d have learned already…” I paused. “I think what you meant to say was that you always wanted to know how to never be near a situation where you might have to defend yourself.”
She took that in. I could see her decoding it in her mind. Then her eyes got big and she said “OMG Yes! That is what I meant!”
And there you have it my friends, the truth and the paradox of personal safety.
Most of the world doesn’t want to learn self-defense because that means they need to accept and then take responsibility for their physical safety and that’s scary. What most of the world wants is to never be near any situation where they might have to defend themselves. I get that.
But here’s the problem. The bad-guy doesn’t care. Not only does he not care, but he’s looking for that ‘type’ of person. The one that lacks awareness or walks with blinders on, hoping not to be noticed. Predators smell fear and mostly look for complacency. In other words, not learning anything about self-defense compounds the problem.
What to do? Well I’m biased. I think you should learn more about situational awareness, verbal tactics, fear management and, if necessary, how to protect yourself, your family and even your property if you choose.
Most people think learning self-defense takes a long time, but they’re confusing fighting with martial arts and martial arts with real self-defense, which is a little like confusing lifting something off the ground with Olympic lifting. One is a technical sport the other is a functional movement. Self-defense is about moving tactically not technically.
Learning self-defense doesn’t make you a martial artist anymore than learning CPR makes you a doctor.
Self-defense can and should be taught like first-Aid and CPR— in a day. Just the essentials. Simple and Direct. At then end of the course you have the skills to help save a life…but you’re not a doctor. And that’s how personal defense should be taught…in a day, the essential skills to help save a life.
#beyourownbodyguard
Learn more about the BYOB concept
If this post made you smile or think, please hit that little heart icon and share it too.
I use Medium for spontaneous short brain dumps, if you want to learn more about what I do in the training realm, click here to get my newsletter SpearTips.
Tony.

Hi. Let me know if I’m misunderstanding how insurance works here:
The inputs below show the core insurance model variables with an assumption that no profit is being made. Obviously where the profit exists is in the fact that the likelihood of an accident would be less than the 10% shown here (for conventional vehicles/traffic), which is what makes the insurance industry a viable gamble — theory of large numbers implies that if you insure enough people, you’ll get a result that comes close to the probability of the <10% accident rate, and as such, will be able to operate a profitable business.

On the left, the monthly accident rate is 10%, the average claim is $1,000, and people are paying $100/mo in order to get to a nice happy break-even point (again, we’ll omit/assume it’s obvious where the profit could be built in.)
On the right, the monthly accident rate is 1% because of the safer vehicle technology, the average claim is still $1,000 (because a wrecked car is a wrecked car), and people are paying $10/mo for the model to break even.
Does this all look correct?
If so, please explain the following:
How is everyone on the right column paying $10/mo when the “1%” who get in accidents are now the same 1% all the time? It’s no longer a random event that “could happen to anyone” — the 99 customers in self-driving cars are not getting in accidents (certainly not at-fault accidents, to say the least). So, following the wisdom of any good fiscal conservative, is it not obvious that the 99 responsible drivers/cars would pay closer to a tenth of that cost, while the person who keeps getting in accidents would pay 10x? If that were the case, the one conventional driver would still be paying the same $100/mo he paid in the left column when all cars were conventional, so nothing for him has changed (of course, it has indeed changed, since everyone else in society has drastically improved their financial leverage… but we can leave that alone for now.)
If the accident rate drops to 1/10th of what it was with conventional cars, and premiums follow suit, then how does the insurance company maintain enough revenue volume to operate a successful model? Geico scales its staff and infrastructure down to 1/10th its current operation (as any multi-national corporation would do, right? Just happily wither away until there was nothing left?), but it still has to insure a large enough swath of customers to grab that 1% who is accident prone — or, target them directly and forget about self-driving car customers. So you’ve got 1/10th the claims adjusters, paperwork processors, customer support reps, and connections to body shops. What happens when one of those 1% drivers in Wyoming gets in an accident, and your closest claims adjuster is in Colorado? You fly him out there? With what money? Certainly not with the 1/10th of revenue you have. You need to drastically increase the cost of that driver’s premium to offset your expenses if you want to continue operating a viable business model.
Did I miss anything?

Highline BETA Partners with Cookhouse Lab to Bring Startup Innovation into Insurance
At Highline BETA we believe that a key way to drive startup success is through partnerships with corporate leaders. Our mission is to unlock the assets locked up inside big companies (think: ideas, industry expertise, customers, distribution, capital), and combine them with the assets of startups (think: speed, ability to take risk, new technology) to create winning conditions for everyone. Big companies get access to startup innovation, and startups get access to critical accelerants that help them win.
In the spirit of that mission, we’ve partnered with Cookhouse Lab, a new open innovation space in Toronto dedicated to InsurTech and the insurance industry.

It’s the first of its kind in the world — bringing together the biggest global insurance companies, technologists, academics, entrepreneurs and more to work on new problems and challenges. Cookhouse Lab is a joint venture of LOGiQ3 Group (a leading insurance and reinsurance outsourcing and consulting firm) and msg global (a global product-based systems integrator serving insurers and reinsurers.) These guys know the insurance industry inside out, and they know it’s ripe for innovation, disruption and growth.
Highline BETA will provide Cookhouse Lab and its corporate partners with a conduit into the startup ecosystem. We’ll be looking for kick ass InsurTech startups and entrepreneurs to bring into the space and work with the corporate partners. The insurance industry is behind the times (compared to what’s happening in FinTech overall), but we think that’s going to change. We’re bullish on the opportunities in insurance, and have made it one of our key areas of focus.
With Cookhouse Lab and the insurance companies there, we’ll be able to bridge the gaps between big companies and startups, and bring InsurTech innovation to life.

Recurring Revenue vs. Disability Insurance
You may not know this, but a few weeks ago, I had my left leg amputated below the knee. About six months before that I sold Sifter. The two events are somewhat related, but they didn’t have to be. Financially, things were great because recurring revenue beats the pants off of disability insurance. Regardless of how many hours you put in, recurring revenue still just shows up.
Let’s rewind a few years…
In July of 2013, I had been working on Sifter for a little over five years, and it had been paying me a comfortable full-time salary for the last two of those years. (It was below market rate, but it was close enough.) Around that time, I went in for a minor surgery on my ankle. Surgery went fine, but during recovery, the polar ice machine gave me frostbite on my foot. Three years later, I’d choose to amputate, but what happened with Sifter during those three years is where it gets interesting.
No source of income beats creating something that makes money while you’re asleep. Or sick. Or in the hospital. Or busy caring for a loved one.
During the first four months after that original surgery, I averaged a surgery every two weeks. That’s a lot of downtime. The surgeries take enough time between the actual surgery and recovery, but that’s not what really kills productivity. The checkups and followups. The second, third, and fourth opinion appointments. The driving. The lab work. The pain. It all turns your days to swiss cheese, and it’s almost impossible to find uninterrupted blocks of time to get in the zone and do important work. But, you know what? Sifter kept on trucking. Growing even.
Two of those surgeries led to a three-week stay in the hospital where I couldn’t get anything done. Even my first couple of weeks back at home were a struggle. My body was beat up, weak, and drowsy from pain killers. Just answering support emails was a struggle. The good news? Sifter never skipped a bit, and my paychecks kept coming. Things improved over the next year, but my ankle never recovered. I began talking to doctors about amputation. Most advised a different, but still significant, surgery. More appointments and opinions. More downtime. More physical therapy. Yet Sifter kept on trucking. About two years of averaging part-time work, and Sifter’s growth finally slowed to crawl.
But here’s the thing…
Those years never put a financial strain on our family. Regardless of hours worked, my salary stayed the same. Actually, a year into it, Sifter had more cash, and I got a raise. Let’s let that sink in. I was working less and making more. Even at the best full-time job with the best disability insurance, that would have never happened. And if it did, it certainly wouldn’t have lasted three years.
So what’s my point?
No source of income beats creating something that makes money while you’re asleep. Or sick. Or in the hospital. Or busy caring for a loved one. If you’re consulting or freelancing, your income is tied directly to your hours worked. At some point, though, there’s a ceiling. More importantly, if something happens where you can’t put in the hours, your income will drop.
If you only get one thing from this, let it be this next paragraph…
Once you have a profitable SaaS application with recurring revenue, you have a built-in disability insurance policy. It’s actually better than that because even if a loved one gets sick, you still get paid if you take time off to help them. If the downtime lasts for years, then it’s likely that at some point, the business will suffer, but it will keep going. And you’ll keep getting paid. Even if your application never supports you full-time, it will still make money and help provide financial support.
Recurring revenue digital products are one of the best bets you can make. Whether it’s writing a book, selling some sort of digital goods, or launching a SaaS application, it will help. At this point, you might be wondering, “But Garrett, if it’s so great, why did you sell Sifter?” And I’d tell you that’s a great question.
The reason is multi-faceted, but I assure you that it had nothing to do with money. Sifter’s growth had slowed, but it was very comfortable financially. After almost three years of juggling it all, the process had taken its toll. I was just tired. I also had different priorities. I wanted spend more time with my wife and two young daughters without being haunted by the amount of catchup I felt I had to do. Everyone’s situation will be different, but even if you never want your side project to be your full-time gig, the sooner you create something that automatically makes money regardless of hours worked, the better off you’ll be.

Originally published at garrettdimon.com.


Fitbit, wearables, and the insurance data conundrum
Imagine you’re an exec at Fitbit. You brought the company public with a decent return for your investors. But now you have to live with the scrutiny of public markets, and they’re not pretty. The overall category of wearables has a bit of a problem currently, as it’s not quite clear whether it can support ecosystems in it’s own right, or whether it’s dependent on a larger ecosystem. As we’ve covered in the latest episode of Thingonomics (in German, out any day now…), even Android Wear isn’t selling well enough to convince Android OEMs to continue making them. Oh, and then there’s the attrition rate in wearables, which is awful, as the analysis by RockHealth from last year has shown. So, not a pretty business to be in.
So, what do you do? Withings, one of the main competitors in the wearables space got acquired by someone with more resources than you, and a track record of working with regulators to bring products to market. Their trajectory is clearly health-tech, and you really don’t want to deal with the FDA and the time and cost associated with bringing health products to market. You can’t outright compete with Apple, the elephant in the room, because you can’t fully tap into iOS, and Android Wear is a dud, as covered above. So you decide to do a corporate wellness program.
How this works is pretty straightforward. You partner with a large corporate to subsidise or buy your product for their workforce, for a whole litany of potential upside. But your clients are corporate, so what ultimately sticks is the vague promise of reduced health insurance premiums due to a fact of better overall health of their workforce by virtue of not sitting on their arse all day. That’s the rough outline. And it seems to be working.
Technology analyst group Gartner forecasts that by 2018, some 2m people will be required by their employer to wear fitness trackers. […]
“But at the end of the day we wanted to encourage people to participate.” More than 2,500 employees signed up in the first week and he says the company is on course to easily beat its target of enrolling 20 per cent of SAP’s north American organisation in the scheme. “Being a data-driven tech company, from a demographics standpoint we think it’s going to connect with our employees.” […]
SAP is one of a growing number of companies that hope they may eventually be able to improve their staff’s health enough to lower healthcare costs.
FT: Technology wearables are in workplace health vogue
And of course, incentivising your customers workforce can work wonders for your product sell-through. And if you have concrete financial upside associated with the use of your product, that helps solve some of that pesky attrition problem, too.
BP gives employees a lower-deductible on their health plan if they walk 1m steps in a year, validating the results using trackers.
Now, there’s a couple of problems with that approach, and their not exclusive to wearables, or healthcare. You see them crop up in pay-per-mile car insurance (or early-driver car insurance), for instance, too. The first is that if you just flip the rhetoric around, that discount you get for getting tracked is essentially a tax you have to pay for the privilege of not being tracked (or at least your tracking data not being shared with an insurance company). Looked at in this way, it becomes a lot less appealing and a lot more dystopian, and potentially discriminatory in ways that would be litigious if not done in a technologically mediated way.
But the second is more interesting, and more threatening to the self-interest of insurance providers themselves. Taken to the logical conclusion, you’d insure every customer according to their own risk profile. Low probability of having to fall back on insurance = low premiums. High risk — high premiums. Now, this is nothing new — insurers have worked this way for most of their existence. The level of granularity and the speed of data acquisition present what is perceived as new opportunities to the actuaries at insurers. And by virtue of this, you incentivise better, less risky behaviour, and drive down costs in claims. Here’s how Izabella Kaminska with the FT puts it:
The proposition here is simple. Soon enough, telematics companies will gather data from all our connected devices, fitbits and cars, scrutinise it intricately, then determine whether we are “good” or “bad” agents. Good behaviours will be rewarded with cheaper insurance policies, bad ones will be penalised. The relative cost of being a bad agent, meanwhile, will incentivise good behaviours, eliminating evil from our world forever. Amen. […]
There’s only one problem. Personalising insurance contracts to this degree undermines the whole concept of insurance.
Insurance doesn’t really work unless risk is pooled in such a way that good agents pay over the odds to the benefit of the bad ones.
FT: Breaking insurance models with big data
In short: if there’s not some mismatch between premiums and claims for the individual, the insurance model doesn’t work. And while the prima facie argument of insurers is to improve behaviour of their riskier customers and thus improve the overall economics, it looks awfully close to trying to improve the premiums/claims ratio for individual customers. Now, this might draw regulatory ire, and the quoted FT piece hints at that. But at the core, going down this path makes insurers superfluous, in that with perfect information symmetry, the socialising aspect of it falls by the wayside, and they work much more like a savings fund. Now, why would you need the insurance overhead for that?
That argument isn’t to say that connected products cannot make sense for insurers or in improving workforce health, but you need to think about your objectives and your strategy. Going down the path of financial optimization ultimately isn’t going to work, and only going to add to a lot of insurers woes that come with increasing volume of autonomous and electric vehicles (which is going to be interesting in its own right) and constantly improving longevity and precision medicine.
Now, for Fitbit, which we started with, this all ain’t pretty, as it’s hard to see where their growth should come from. They don’t compete well on the top end of the market, and in the middle are an undifferentiated product with huge brand expense. They might be market leader in terms of volume in fitness trackers, but they fail to enable new ecosystems, and are more of a gateway product. People who stay with the category churn away to premium products (Garmin or the Apple Watch come to mind), and people who don’t into non-consumption. It’s hard to see how this could lead to a sustainable future for Fitbit.


Cancel Thousands Of Health Insurance Plans
The Affordable Care Act has insured 20 million people, driving the uninsured rate to record lows. Yet all of the GOP presidential candidates propose repealing the Affordable Care Act without offering a comprehensive alternative.
Donald Trump’s health care plan is a rehash of the same old conservative policies and would leave 129 million Americans with pre-existing conditions exposed to discrimination from insurers. Under his plan, millions of seniors would also pay more for prescription drugs and families who live just above the poverty line would lose their expanded Medicaid coverage and could go uninsured.
Share on Twitter || Share on Facebook
Quick Facts:
20 million people have gained health insurance under the Affordable Care Act. TWEET

For the first time ever, the uninsured rate in the U.S. has fallen below 10 percent to 9.1 percent thanks to the Affordable Care Act. TWEET
The uninsured rate for non-elderly adults (ages 18 to 64) declined by 43 percent between October 2013 and early 2016 (from 20.3 percent to 11.5 percent). TWEET
More than 6 million young adults (ages 19–25) have gained insurance under the Affordable Care Act. TWEET
Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, 129 million people with pre-existing conditions no longer have to worry about an insurer denying or dropping their coverage. TWEET
Since Medicaid expansion started going into effect, total Medicaid enrollment has increased by 14.5 million people. TWEET

Call It What You Want: Trumpcare Still Strips Insurance from 24 Million Americans

What do we call it?
What do we call this new bill Republicans are rushing through to take away health care from millions of people? Is it Trumpcare? Or is it Ryancare?
Both of these men are branding experts. The president put his name on a line of steaks. He’s put his name on a magazine, on hotels. The speaker of the house has worked hard to be thought of as a policy wonk and serious thinker; he has branded everything he’s worked on, from the Ryan budget to “a better way.”
Neither leader of the Republican Party wants to own this thing. And that’s because Trumpcare is one of the worst pieces of legislation I’ve seen in decades.
The process has been a mess. And this is despite the fact that Republicans had 7 years to work on a plan.
At first, House Republicans tried to move the bill forward without a score from the Congressional Budget Office (CBO). Then they realized no one wanted to vote on something without knowing how much it would cost or how many people would lose health coverage.
Now, they’re saying the score either doesn’t matter, or is wrong — except for the areas where they look good. They’ve spent the last 48 hours trashing the CBO when there’s ample evidence that for the last 8 years, they’ve referred to CBO as an expert source when it fits their needs.
The legislative process requires hearings. It requires expert testimony. And that’s not a mere formality. That’s how you get a decent product. For all the complaints about how the ACA was passed, they had hearings. They had discussions. President Obama even went to the Republican retreat and engaged.
Moving this fast without hearings is the kind of thing you do to name a post office — because it’s non-controversial. Or it’s the kind of thing you do for something you don’t want people to look at very closely. Every moment that passes, the coalition frays — if it ever existed in the first place.
Now, you have criticism from literally left, right, and center. And that’s in part because no one saw this coming. No one expected a bill that would look like this.

During the campaign, this administration promised not to cut Medicaid. They promised that everyone — every single American — would have health insurance. But here we are. And if Trumpcare becomes law, 14 million people will lose their health insurance by next year.
What will it mean if people no longer have health care? This week, the Washington Post featured the stories of people in a single county whose lives have changed for the better — all because of Medicaid.
In McDowell County, Medicaid has helped thousands of people get access to physical therapy and immunizations. It’s allowed them to see a counselor for mental health problems and opioid addiction. It’s helped them afford the medication they need, instead of relying on free samples from clinics.
These services don’t just benefit individuals. They benefit society by making sure that people are healthy and can work and contribute to our economy. They allow us to save money by focusing on prevention instead of treatment.
This is what’s at stake. These are the services that will go away, because Trumpcare is going to cut Medicaid — by $880 billion.
Trumpcare is also going to impose an age tax that will allow insurance companies to charge older people more money for health insurance — a lot more.
Trumpcare would also impose an age tax that will allow insurance companies to charge older people more money for health insurance — a lot more.
For example, a 64-year old will be charged up to 5 times more than a 21-year-old. The older you get, the more they charge you — starting at 25 years old.
That’s why the AARP has come out against this bill. Because every year you get older, they will charge you more. This is an age tax.
There’s an important point to be made here about process. This is not a health care bill. If it were a health care bill, it wouldn’t be in reconciliation.
What does that mean? It means that Republicans, in order to enact a health care law, would need 60 votes. They don’t have them. So essentially, they’re stuck dealing with taxes using the reconciliation process, because it only requires 51 votes.
That means this bill is a tax vehicle. And so then the question becomes, who gets money, and who loses money?
And on that count, this is one of the biggest wealth transfers in American history. It’s a transfer from working class Americans to rich Americans. It takes money from the people who need the most help, and gives it to the very wealthy.
Trumpcare is one of the biggest wealth transfers in American history. It’s a transfer from working class Americans to rich Americans. It takes money from the people who need the most help, and gives it to the very wealthy.
Here we are in 2017, just a few months out from an election where income inequality was one of the driving issues, and the Republicans take from that experience that their mandate is to go in and reduce taxes for insurance executives and for the investor class by cutting Medicaid by $880 billion.
It’s like they were asleep all last year. Or maybe they were never very serious about income inequality.
We don’t need another election to know that this is not what the American people expect from Congress. They expect bipartisan compromise. They expect results that will make their health care better.
There’s no doubt that there’s plenty of room for improvement in existing law. But Trumpcare does not improve health care for Americans. It implodes it. And that is a threat to the progress we’ve made these past 7 years. It’s a threat to one-sixth of the economy. And most of all, it’s a threat to at least 24 million people who stand to lose their health insurance
These threats are the reason that the Senate needs to come together and say: slow down. Let’s work together. Let’s work on forming a bipartisan foundation. Let’s have hearings. And most importantly, let’s not impose this catastrophe on the American people.

Insurance Technology Market Overview — Q4 2016

The above sector map organizes the Insurance Technology sector into 14 categories and shows a sampling of companies in each category.
Auto Insurance: Companies that offer insurance for automobiles and motorcycles, as well as those that facilitate the process of auto insurance. Examples include car telematics products which detect your mileage and driving behavior to customize your insurance plan.
Consumer Insurance Management Platforms: Companies that enable consumers to manage their insurance and claims, usually through a mobile application. Examples include mobile apps that allow consumers to file claims right at the spot of the car accident, and to buy travel insurance on the go.
Employee Benefits Platforms: Companies that help enterprises build or utilize platforms that deliver healthcare and other insurance products to their employees. Examples include web portals through which enterprises can sign in and give their employees the option of buying several healthcare packages.
Enterprise/Commercial Insurance: Companies that offer insurance plans for large/medium/small-sized businesses and enterprises. Examples include insurance plans for startup founders and freelancers, insurance for large enterprises such as liability insurance, and workers compensation insurance.
Health/Travel Insurance: Companies that offer health and/or travel insurance, either for individuals or for businesses. Examples include health insurance plans that are customizable to your exact needs, and travel insurance that can be adjusted based on where you are.
Insurance Comparison/Marketplace: Companies that serve as a marketplace for consumers to buy insurance of any kind (car to home to health), or compare different insurance quotes. Examples include 3rd party companies that don’t offer insurance plans themselves, but act as a brokerage agent between insurance providers and consumers.
Insurance Data/Intelligence: Companies that collect, process, and analyze data analytics and business intelligence for the insurance industry. Examples include background checks on an individual’s history to determine insurance eligibility, or inspections on a real estate property for potential risks.
Insurance Education/Resources: Companies that offer educational material and resources that give information about how insurance works. Examples include news outlets focused on the insurance industry, and community forums that exchange knowledge of insurance between individuals.
Insurance Infrastructure/Backend: Companies that either underwrite insurance policies or help insurance companies with their day-to-day operations. Examples include insurance underwriters, CRM for agents and lawyers, communication tools, and claim filing tools.
Insurance User Acquisition: Companies that help insurance companies acquire and manage new leads and clients. Examples include platforms that are specifically designed for marketing insurance policies to potential customers, and those that record and manage insurance companies’ customers.
Life, Home, Property & Casualty Insurance: Companies that offer life, home, and property & casualty insurance, as well as other kinds of insurance such as renters, disability, and marriage insurance. Examples include websites that offer life, home, and P&C insurance in packages.
P2P Insurance: Companies that offer peer-to-peer insurance, in which a group of policyholders jointly pay for the insurance of an item that they mutually own, share, or rent (such as a car, house, or media equipment). Examples include P2P insurance platforms in which a group of bicyclists jointly buy insurance for all of their bikes.
Product Insurance: Companies that offer insurance and warranties for products that consumers purchase, from tech gadgets to diamonds. Examples include insurance plans for your smartphone in case it is stolen or is broken.
Reinsurance: Companies that provide insurance for other insurance companies. Examples include companies that offer insurers coverage to mitigate and manage their risks.
We are currently tracking 982 Insurance Technology companies in 14 categories across 53 countries, with a total of $16.6 Billion in funding. Click here to learn more about the full Insurance Technology landscape report and database.

Health Insurance Claims For Obesity-Related Conditions Rise For Children
According to a new analysis.
The number of health insurance claims filed for young people for conditions usually associated with older adults — such as high blood pressure, Type 2 diabetes and sleep apnea — has drastically increased between 2011 and 2015, according to an analysis released today.
Image courtesy of Unsplash
Fair Health, a nonprofit that serves as a “national clearinghouse for claims data,” reviewed the insurance claims of around 150 million people, and found that claims for Type 2 diabetes doubled for people under 23; claims for prediabetes rose 110 percent in children; high blood pressure claims rose 67 percent; and sleep apnea claims rose 161 percent.
Read more about the findings on NPR.


7 Tech Companies Changing the Way We Think of Life Insurance
Read the full story here.
As we have been exploring the world of InsuranceTech, there are various sectors worth paying attention to within a single industry. Previously, we have looked at some of the most promising InsuranceTech startups focusing on health insurance and car insurance. There is another important segment to cover — life insurance. As we mentioned before, InsuranceTech is becoming one of the hottest industries attracting significant attention and funding. Therefore, entrepreneurs are looking to enter the industry to get a slice of the trillion-dollar pie. Let’s look at the players rethinking the life insurance segment.
PolicyGenius
The company offers a highly tailored insurance checkup platform, where users can discover their coverage gaps and review solutions for their exact needs. PolicyGenius provides the only place online to shop for life, long-term disability and renters and pet insurance through its highly accurate quoting engines that offer side-by-side comparisons of tailored policies.
Sureify
Sureify is a life insurance technology company focused on creating innovative life insurance products. Sureify’s product offering has two fronts, one consumer facing and the other carrier facing. On the consumer side, the Sureify product ties life insurance to the latest in health tracking devices, allowing policyholders to save on premiums each month as a reward for meeting health goals.
Find out more here.
Ladder
Ladder combines the power of innovative technology with world-class financial and insurance expertise to make it easy for anyone to access life insurance. The company aims to make a tectonic change in the life insurance market and has some very notable investors backing its mission, among which are Lightspeed (Snapchat), Formation 8 (Oscar), and NYCA (digit).
Bima
Bima is the leader in mobile-delivered insurance in emerging markets. Launched in late 2010, Bima currently reaches seven million people across eight countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, including Ghana, Senegal, Tanzania, Mauritius, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, and Honduras.
Continue exploring more companies here.

Insurance Technology Category Innovation Quadrant — Q4

Our Innovation Quadrant provides a snapshot of the average funding and average age for the different Insurance Technology categories and how they compare with one another.
 
 • Heavyweights: Categories with high average funding and high average age. These categories are comprised of companies that have reached maturity with significant financing.
• Established: Categories with low average funding and high average age. These categories are comprised of companies that have reached maturity with less financing.
• Disruptors: Categories with high average funding and low average age. These categories are comprised of companies that are less mature with significant financing.
• Pioneers: Categories with low average funding and low average age. These categories are comprised of companies that are less mature with earlier stages of financing.
The definitions of the Insurance Technology categories represented in the above Innovation Quadrant are as follows:
Auto Insurance: Companies that offer insurance for automobiles and motorcycles, as well as those that facilitate the process of auto insurance. Examples include car telematics products which detect your mileage and driving behavior to customize your insurance plan.
Consumer Insurance Management Platforms: Companies that enable consumers to manage their insurance and claims, usually through a mobile application. Examples include mobile apps that allow consumers to file claims right at the spot of the car accident, and to buy travel insurance on the go.
Employee Benefits Platforms: Companies that help enterprises build or utilize platforms that deliver healthcare and other insurance products to their employees. Examples include web portals through which enterprises can sign in and give their employees the option of buying several healthcare packages.
Enterprise/Commercial Insurance: Companies that offer insurance plans for large/medium/small-sized businesses and enterprises. Examples include insurance plans for startup founders and freelancers, insurance for large enterprises such as liability insurance, and workers compensation insurance.
Health/Travel Insurance: Companies that offer health and/or travel insurance, either for individuals or for businesses. Examples include health insurance plans that are customizable to your exact needs, and travel insurance that can be adjusted based on where you are.
Insurance Comparison/Marketplace: Companies that serve as a marketplace for consumers to buy insurance of any kind (car to home to health), or compare different insurance quotes. Examples include 3rd party companies that don’t offer insurance plans themselves, but act as a brokerage agent between insurance providers and consumers.
Insurance Data/Intelligence: Companies that collect, process, and analyze data analytics and business intelligence for the insurance industry. Examples include background checks on an individual’s history to determine insurance eligibility, or inspections on a real estate property for potential risks.
Insurance Education/Resources: Companies that offer educational material and resources that give information about how insurance works. Examples include news outlets focused on the insurance industry, and community forums that exchange knowledge of insurance between individuals.
Insurance Infrastructure/Backend: Companies that either underwrite insurance policies or help insurance companies with their day-to-day operations. Examples include insurance underwriters, CRM for agents and lawyers, communication tools, and claim filing tools.
Insurance User Acquisition: Companies that help insurance companies acquire and manage new leads and clients. Examples include platforms that are specifically designed for marketing insurance policies to potential customers, and those that record and manage insurance companies’ customers.
Life, Home, Property & Casualty Insurance: Companies that offer life, home, and property & casualty insurance, as well as other kinds of insurance such as renters, disability, and marriage insurance. Examples include websites that offer life, home, and P&C insurance in packages.
P2P Insurance: Companies that offer peer-to-peer insurance, in which a group of policyholders jointly pay for the insurance of an item that they mutually own, share, or rent (such as a car, house, or media equipment). Examples include P2P insurance platforms in which a group of bicyclists jointly buy insurance for all of their bikes.
Product Insurance: Companies that offer insurance and warranties for products that consumers purchase, from tech gadgets to diamonds. Examples include insurance plans for your smartphone in case it is stolen or is broken.
Reinsurance: Companies that provide insurance for other insurance companies. Examples include companies that offer insurers coverage to mitigate and manage their risks.
We are currently tracking 1010 Insurance Technology companies in 14 categories across 53 countries, with a total of $16.7 Billion in funding. Click here to learn more about the full Insurance Technology landscape report and database.

I don’t know what the breaking point is on all this health insurance and The Democrats crowing about how any more people getting insurance coverage fuels my anger something terrible.
At. What. Cost.
At what cost.
Last year, 29% and after a long back and forth with the Ohio Dept of Insurance, they determine it perfectly legal. My DEMOCRATIC Senator doesn’t care, everyone else in this state is GOP so they just cheer our misery… pack of assholes… I’m writing Hillary Clinton a letter a day, but I know in my gut that’s a stupid waste of time. It’s like they are deliberately trying to exterminate us. Why does government even exist if it doesn’t give a crap about human beings? There is literally no purpose for government if we don’t exist.
The Revolution is coming. And it won’t be pretty for either side. I am at peak anger every day just thinking about how much I pay for premiums for NOTHING! I get why people snap. I really do.
We’re literally being stripped of health and wealth and media just keeps giving that baffoon Trump airtime over stupid crap he says. That’s news, but the actual conditions of rage that is fueling his candidacy isn’t. Smdh.

What does “Can I use my health insurance for x?” actually mean?
To “use” your insurance to most people means “will my insurance cover this in-full?” Here are the conditions that must be met for your health insurance to cover things in full:
You must have spent your entire deductible
You have a plan without co-pays (very, very rare)
You have a plan without co-insurance (increasingly rare)
The expense happened during a routine annual physical and was a recommended screening test for your age/gender/risk factors (thanks Obama!)
Certain forms of contraceptives (thanks Obama!)
The real questions are:
What will it cost me to see a doctor or visit an urgent care center or ER?
What will it cost me to get tests?
What will it cost me to get procedures?
The answer to these 3 questions is, before you’ve spent your entire deductible, you are responsible for paying for the entire cost of these things.
So, now the question becomes “will my health insurance cover this in-full after I’ve spent my deductible?”
The increasingly likely answer is no. In decades past, when we as adults were introduced to the concept of health insurance, insurance used to cover all visits. Then they started introducing co-pays (to visit the doctor, you have to pay $25 at the time of the visit). Then they introduced co-insurance (your health insurance pays, say 80%, of the bill and then you pay the rest after you’ve met your deductible). The real reason people are confused about this is because deductibles, co-pays, and co-insurance are relatively new concepts that were introduced gradually over time. As you can see, these are measures to offload costs from health insurance companies and employers onto you. The days of insurance fronting the costs of all things are over.
To clear things up, until you’ve spent your entire deductible, co-pays and co-insurance do not yet apply. After you’ve spent your entire deductible, you start sharing the cost through co-pays and co-insurance.
So, before you’ve spent your deductible, the smartest thing to do is to be a super savvy healthcare consumer. If you have to spend $4,000 out of your own pocket before insurance even kicks in, it’s important to spend that money wisely in partnership with a doctor who’s looking out for your spend. And that’s what we do at Sherpaa.



The Power of Collaborative Efforts in the Insurance Industry
Read the full story here.
“The most imminent effects of disruption will be felt in the banking sector; however, the greatest impact of disruption is likely to be felt in the insurance sector,” was stated in the report of WEF in 2015.
Indeed, insurance, as an industry traditionally controlled by national corporations and the government, is one of the most exciting areas of innovation and the highest disruption potential for tech-powered startups. In 2015, more than $1.2 billion was invested in InsurTech startups — 6X the amount invested in 2010.
Since 2013, insurance tech has been actively taking off and creating its own niche in the market. In 2016, several incumbents are planning to disrupt the $4.5-trillion industry by leveraging technological capabilities. The use of disruptive technologies like big data, Internet of Things (IoT), mobile technology, AI, and blockchain are gaining momentum and InsurTech firms are looking for a scope to capitalize it.
Find out more here.
However, despite the natural expectation that the mammoths of industry are increasingly threatened and will experience substantial hardships, it appears that corporate players are able to keep up with the pace of industry transformation. A number of largest insurers have been developing a way to collaborate efforts and learn from newcomers on the ways to bring the best of what each can offer together. Moreover, those insurers have also been supporting dedicated accelerator programs to meet the innovators and find the Uber of insurance.
It appears that insurance industry took a slightly different path from the banking industry when it came to facing competitors. A study by PwC and Startupbootcamp suggests that 75% of the surveyed insurance senior executives believed that the biggest impact on the industry would come from building products that could address the changing needs of the customer. Large insurers take a customer-centric position and believe collaboration to be an important step for the common good.
In addition, 79% of surveyed executives indicated that their companies are involved with tech startups in one or another way (engage in joint partnerships with financial technology companies — 20%, buy and sell services to financial technology companies — 16%, etc.). The result indicates that large insurers are eager to embrace healthy transformation in order to remain relevant and competitive against other corporate players and further entrants.
As Sabine VanderLinden, Managing Director at Startupbootcamp InsurTech, commented, “The insurance industry is slowly waking up to the inevitability of change around it and startups are looking to facilitate, rather than hinder, change. The key will be working together.”
New opportunities in the insurance industry brought up by InsurTech startups
Having the prerequisite of openness to innovation in place, insurers need to assess the areas requiring improvements and what technology can bring to existing models.
Blockchain technology, for example, could bring agility and liveliness to policy management making it possible to offer more customized solutions that are responsive to recorded changes. Blockchain-powered smart contracts combined with real-time recording can be applied to automate the claims settlement and offer automated policy renewals that are best suitable to new conditions.
Advanced wearable devices and other sensory technology of smart cities can stream meaningful data to feed the policy management system. Health-tracking devices and smartphones are now capable of monitoring and storing the physical metrics of a person, which — in the future — can be applied to the insurance apps to contribute to the risk management and to offer more customized solutions.
Artificial intelligence and tech startups working on advanced machines can aid in smart underwriting. Learning and improving, AI algorithms will be able to think like a human underwriter when performing risk assessments, constantly enriching the knowledge and efficiency. Advanced AI can also enable companies to be updated on the latest regulatory implementations and ‘advise’ insurance companies on policy development and pricing models and more.
Continue reading here.

Are you a tax, finance, real estate, loan, insurance professional looking to diversity your business?
Take a look at what we can do for you.
http://michaelm.vfgpro.com/agentpro

We have a real good value proposition for insurance,real estate,mortgage brokers,accountants, and tax professionals

“Unemployment insurance and food and housing assistance need urgent investment”. Ever notice how government spending, when extolled by the Liberal side, is always an “investment”? Sorry folks, it’s all just government spending money it takes from the taxpayers’ wallets; and those wallets are not unlimited.
The fundamental claim of “universal tax credits” (read: universal minimum income) that can replace all current safety net spending, as well as raise all people into at least the bottom tier of the middle class, is that it will cost less than our current welfare system. Because our current system is so complex, duplicative and full of fraud, there is some merit to the claim.
But that is not the whole story. Against that is the reality that the plan amounts to a social sanction of the idea that people can choose, if they wish, the easy path, dispense with education, or work, or industry, or contribution, and other people will pay for their life’s needs out of their hard won money. And there is no doubt that many will take advantage of that, and those who pay will think of themselves as suckers. Moreover, it is the nature of politicians to continually raise the benefits of all welfare programs; the level of universal minimum pay, starting at the lowest level of the middle class, will surely rise as politicians vie for votes. And slowly new welfare programs would find their back on top of this scheme. It is the nature of politics and politicians.
Another, larger problem is that a universal income is a horrible idea for any nation with unsecured borders and a liberal immigration policy. Is anyone so dense they would not recognize that there are hundreds of millions of people who would consider the proposed bottom rung of middle class life in the USA to be an unbelievable luxury? And to get it for simply walking across our borders to be an irresistible lure? People would flood across our borders, making the million per year following the ill-advised 1986 amnesty a joke by comparison. All ICE and Border Patrol resources would be simply swept aside in the tsunami. No possible vetting process could cope. And certainly our Liberal Supreme Court would say all those people have a right to equal access to the “tax credits”. If not, a President as unbound by the law and the Constitution as is Obama would surely grant them that right in exchange for their votes.
A line in the Federalist Papers goes, “If men were angels, no government would be necessary”. Well, if all men were principled, honest and upright, this idea might have a chance at success. But they are not, and it doesn’t.

You make a fundamental assumption: that Obamacare, that 2,000 page law written by insurance companies and pharmaceutical companies, and its attendant tens of thousands of pages of regulations, was the only way to deal with the pre-existing condition problem. That problem was well known, and there was bipartisan agreement that it had to be solved, but the proposals always came wrapped up in other partisan agendas, so the problem persisted.
Obamacare did a lot, a very lot, of other things besides address pre-existing conditions. It made a lot of the problems of the healthcare system worse for a lot of people. Other parts of Obamacare are failing. There surely were better ways to address the problems, your problem, than Obamacare. But our politicians of both parties, and the insurance and pharmaceutical companies that bought and owned those politicians, did not solve those problems. They used those problems as leverage to get passed into law other things they wanted.
What you seem to be telling us now is that Obamacare is the best system there is, that there was and is no better way to have better healthcare at a more affordable cost. I can’t believe that is true.

Insurance gets a bad rap, but it’s not as bad as you think!

We know, we know — insurance is probably one of the least exciting things you have to deal with as a start-up or small business. And not so long ago, it was also one of the most stressful and inconvenient as well.
It’s fair to say that business insurance has a bit of a reputation, whether it’s related to poor service, an old fashioned approach, lack of flexibility or unsuitable cover. It’s not surprising that arranging protection drops down to the bottom of the ‘to-do’ list for many businesses.
Start-ups and SMEs today are digital, innovative and know good service when they see it. And we know you expect the same from your insurer! So you’ll be pleased to hear that there’s a revolution underway, in how insurance is designed and delivered for the businesses of 2016 and beyond.
Here’s a few reasons why you should take another look:
More flexibility — Digital Risks offers pay-monthly insurance that can be changed or cancelled at any time, so you have the flexibility to alter your cover as your needs evolve. This also means you’re sure to have the right level of cover at the right time, and you’re not paying more than you need.

2.Tech-savvy — gone are the days when you have to take time to visit a broker to arrange your insurance. Our online system offers you all the benefits of a broker, but from the comfort of your laptop. And while other online providers offer a simple price comparison and consolidate your risks to a single underwriter, our system considers them individually, placing them with the most suitable underwriter — just like a traditional broker.

3. Cover for new and emerging risks — businesses today are more likely to be hit by a cyber-attack than a fire or flood, so it’s important for insurance to reflect this shift. We’ve spent time working with underwriters to refine our products to fit with the needs of businesses today, including the ever-evolving technical andcyber risks you face. So if the worst does happen, you’ll be back on your feet in no time.

4. Co-working? Covered — despite their popularity, many traditional insurers don’t allow for co-working in their contents policies, leaving businesses wondering how to protect their kit. For us, co-working is the norm — we’re even based in one ourselves! You just need to show us your belongings were stolen by forceable access, whether to the building itself, an office, locker or desk drawer. And if you work with desktop computers, you simply need to make sure they’re attached to the desk with a Kensington Lock.

5. Giving you and your clients confidence — with more and more businesses relying on their knowledge and experience for their business, in areas such as IT consultancy, software development, media, PR and advertising, it’s more important than ever to protect yourself against claims that you’ve given bad advice, or made a mistake. Our professional indemnity cover is designed for the needs of 21st century businesses, so if you ever face a claim, you can rest assured we’ll pick up the bill. And many clients now insist you have PI — so it could even help you win business!

6. Twitter? Facebook? No problem –Social media and blogs are part and parcel of business today, but that means the chance of making a mistake is greater than ever. And if that happens, your business could be liable. That’s why media liability insurance is important, protecting you in the case of any social media mishaps, picking up any legal and compensation costs. So if a tweet does backfire, it doesn’t mean the end of your business.

7. It’s a legal obligation — however boring you find insurance, remember that, as an employer, you are legally required to have at least employers’ liability cover, with hefty fines from the Health & Safety Executive if you don’t comply. And we know you don’t want that!

It’s never going to be what gets you up in the morning, but we hope we’ve helped change your perception of insurance — even just a tiny bit! We’re on a mission to transform the industry one step at a time, with a service that meets the realities of business in 2016 and beyond. So remember, we’ve got your back.
Read next: How do I insure my stuff overnight in a coworking space?

Life insurance company drops Josh McCown after he is named Browns QB

CLEVELAND — Josh McCown has been named starting quarterback of the Cleveland Browns for Week 2, but he will be risking the well-being of his wife and children if he does so. The veteran quarterback was informed today by his life insurance company that they will refuse to cover his policy if he takes the field.
“Obviously, it’s not an ideal situation and is something I need to think about,” said McCown. “It’s a rare opportunity to be able to play quarterback in the NFL. But on the other hand, it’s the Browns. And then there’s this life insurance issue now, too.”
The quarterback said he received an email from MetLife today stating that “starting at quarterback for the Browns would be considered suicide, which is not covered in your policy.”
A spokesman for Metlife reached by a reporter today would not speak specifically about McCown, but did say that banning policy holders from playing for the Browns is “standard across the industry” and that “no reputable company would cover a Browns quarterback. Browns quarterbacks and those people who jump off cliffs and buildings wearing wing-suits. We just don’t do it.”
HONEST NFL Headlines: Week 1
Finally some honesty in NFL journalism.medium.com
McCown only purchased the policy late last year after playing eight games for the Browns.
“It was actually after just my first game in a Browns uniform that I started thinking about death,” he said. “It’s all I think about now.”

Here’s How Successful Obamacare Has Been In Getting Americans Insurance, In One Chart
President Barack Obama speaks about the new health care law during a White House Youth Summit, in the South Court Auditorium in the Eisenhower Executive Office Building on the White House complex in Washington. CREDIT: AP PHOTO/CAROLYN KASTER, FILE
By Cory Herro
The uninsured rate has plunged to the lowest rate ever recorded by Gallup, thanks to the Affordable Care Act’s effort to expand coverage to additional Americans.
Gallup has been tracking the uninsured rate since 2008. Eight years later, the rate of Americans without insurance now stands at 11 percent — down 6.1 points since early 2014, when Obamacare’s individual mandate that required Americans to to enroll in health insurance first took effect.

Gallup researchers credit this first quarter drop to health insurance purchased through Obamacare’s government-run exchanges. These exchanges usually provide the cheapest plans, according to a 2015 federal report.
According to Gallup, people of color and young adults have experienced the largest declines in their uninsured rates — a that trend researchers credit to the individual mandate, the expansion of Medicaid, and the provision allowing young adults to stay on their parents’ plan until age 26. Young adults between the ages 18 of 34 tend to be the healthiest age group, so their inclusion in insurance pools also helps offset the risk added by policyholders with preexisting conditions.

Since President Obama first signed his landmark health care reform law six years ago, researchers have observed a consistent decline in the rate of uninsured Americans, suggesting the law is succeeding in its main goal of expanding health care to people who didn’t previously have it. Last month, Obama announced that some 20 million Americans have gained coverage under the law.
There’s also evidence that Obamacare is helping the most vulnerable Americans gain access to health care. Now that the law provides more options for Americans to get insured, the number of poor people and sick people without insurance has plummeted.
Cory Herro is an intern at ThinkProgress.



You can now use your health insurance to help pay for Virtual Consults with top doctors on HealthTap.

We believe that Virtual Consults should cost you less than a visit to the doctor’s office.
That’s why HealthTap now gives you a fast and easy way to get reimbursed for your next Virtual Consult by your health insurance. In real time, some, or even all, of the cost of a Virtual Consult on HealthTap can be paid by your health insurance plan.*
* subject to coverage

Simply enter your health insurance information once, and HealthTap will automatically check eligibility and co-pay information any time you consult a doctor virtually.
By automating the insurance payment process, we’re saving you time and money, giving doctors more time to focus on delivering you the best available care, and providing you with the time, attention, and top quality care you deserve.

HealthTap is providing you the best virtual care possible, now more affordable than ever.
Invite your doctor so that you can take advantage of this new way of receiving better care.

To learn more, read our press release.

A Private Unemployment Insurance Update
By the time these guys show up, it’s too late to apply for private unemployment insurance.
Earlier this week, I asked Team Billfold whether you would consider paying for private unemployment insurance to supplement your federal/state unemployment benefits, should you lose your job:
A Private Unemployment Insurance Question of the Day
Because federal unemployment benefits aren’t always enough.medium.com
We looked specifically at a company called IncomeAssure:
With IncomeAssure, if you are laid off, you will receive 50% of your former salary, replaced through a combination of state unemployment benefits and our supplemental benefits, instead of the smaller amount your state would replace alone.
A couple Billfolders took advantage of IncomeAssure’s “Get A Quote” feature and shared your quotes in the comments, and I ended up having a longer email conversation with a Billfolder which I have permission to summarize anonymously:
This person has a $28.65 unemployment deduction taken out of each bimonthly paycheck, meaning this person is paying $57.30 per month towards unemployment.
If this person were to lose this job, they would receive approximately $450 in fed/state unemployment benefits per week.
IncomeAssure estimated this person’s monthly premium at $58.01/month, which is comparable to what they’re paying towards fed/state unemployment.
However, IncomeAssure will only pay out $271 per week should this person become unemployed.
In other words, you pay just as much to IncomeAssure as you do to fed/state unemployment (at least in this scenario) but you only get half as much back.
It’s an interesting data point. I don’t know if it means anything, and I don’t know if I need to have an opinion on it, but it’s interesting. What do you think?

“My life depends on having insurance.”
The importance of the ACA to Washingtonians
“My life depends on having insurance.” — Chris Griffiths, breast cancer survivor
Standing with patients, providers and administrators at Swedish Hospital in Issaquah on Thursday, Gov. Jay Inslee called efforts to repeal the federal Affordable Care Act “morally irresponsible.”
Gov. Jay Inslee speaking with an audience member about the Affordable Care Act following a press conference in Issaquah, Wash., Jan. 12, 2017 (Official Governor’s Office Photo)
Congress has begun the process of repeal, despite having no plan for replacing the law’s health protections or addressing the potential loss of 51,000 jobs in Washington. Inslee recently sent letters to members of Washington’s congressional delegation asking each to vote against repeal.
“We will not stand for taking away health care for 750,000 Washingtonians without Congress replacing it on the same day,” Inslee said.

The governor was joined by patients who shared their individual stories, a nurse who discussed the ACA’s positive impact on health delivery and providers who detailed how the ACA has improved health in their communities.
Kandy Kimble traveled from Kittitas County to share her story. Self-employed for many years, she went without health insurance, planning to wait a few more years until she was eligible for Medicare. In 2014, she had a health emergency when eight bleeding ulcers were found. A three-day hospital stay in intensive care resulted in a bill of almost $70,000. After she was discharged, she sought insurance coverage through Washington Healthplanfinder, the insurance exchange. She was later diagnosed with a life-threatening heart condition. Thanks to her insurance, she is able to receive the medication she needs and regularly visit with a cardiologist. Kandy will be eligible for Medicare this September.
“It is so important that people in rural communities can see a doctor and get services when they need them, at a place near their home,” Kandy said.

Kandy was joined at the event by Julie Petersen, CEO of Kittitas Valley Hospital. Julie spoke about the need for patients in her community to have access to care and for rural hospitals to have the funding to care for people like Kandy.
A breast cancer survivor, Chris Griffiths has been able to gain access to health insurance only due to the ACA. In 2005, Chris had a double mastectomy, chemotherapy and radiation. The extensive treatment left her with scarred lungs, asthma and serious kidney problems. When her husband retired, she no longer had access to his employer-sponsored health plan, and her pre-existing medical condition made her uninsurable. Through the ACA, she was able to buy insurance through Washington Healthplanfinder.
“Because of the ACA, my several pre-existing conditions didn’t prevent me from getting insurance,” Chris said.
Joselito Lopez discussed his health journey that began when he was a contract worker at Microsoft in 2006 and suffered two heart attacks that left him unable to work. Without a job, he lost his health insurance. The resulting $50,000 in medical bills pushed him into bankruptcy. Joselito was unable to get affordable insurance until the ACA was implemented.
“After that, I could get the insulin I needed for my diabetes and glasses so I could read and work. And I could see a cardiologist for regular heart care. I no longer need to worry about my pre-existing condition preventing me from qualifying for insurance,” Joselito said.
In a private meeting with the governor, Skyler Nichols shared his experience of living with mental illness and substance abuse disorder. Through the ACA, Skyler has enrolled in Apple Health, the state’s Medicaid program, and received substance use treatment and mental health care. Having predictable and recommended services has allowed Skyler to stabilize his life and find purpose in helping others who are living with chronic, lifelong behavioral health issues.

“If the ACA is repealed without a thoughtful replacement, it will hurt all of us — not just those who rely on it to cover themselves and their families, but people with insurance, health providers, hospitals and more. The impact will be felt across the health care system,” Inslee said. “We will end up paying more in the long run due to the lack of preventive services that will send more people to far-more expensive emergency rooms for care. We all will be better off if we slow down repeal and make needed improvements. This is the right thing to do for our families, our communities and our state.”
The Office of Financial Management has compiled facts sheets and charts that detail the impact of the ACA in Washington.
http://www.ofm.wa.gov/healthcare/ACA_impact.pdf
http://www.ofm.wa.gov/healthcare/ACA%20_impact_charts.pdf
A new website, 1in4wa.com, captures the personal impact of the Affordable Care Act in Washington.
You can watch the full press conference here.

Bill would exempt insurance providers opposed to abortion from Obamacare mandates
In 2005, Maryland attempted to require every hospital in the state to provide abortion services. In response, Congress required that no federal funds from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services that year could be used towards a state government, local government, or federal agency/program that was required to “provide, pay for, provide coverage of, or refer for abortions.” A similar situation unfolded in California this summer.
Congress’s requirement came to be known as the Weldon Amendment, after former Rep. David Weldon (R-FL15) who originally introduced the language. Under both Democratic and Republican leadership, Congress passed this amendment every single year since. Now a large group in Congress — mostly Republicans — wants to codify the annually-passed amendment so that it becomes settled law once and for all.
The Health Care Conscience Rights Act is H.R. 940 in the House and S. 1919 in the Senate. It was introduced by Rep. Diane Black (R-TN6) and Sen. James Lankford (R-OK).
What supporters say
Supporters argue that the bill is a necessary step to protect religious freedom, defending the rights of those who believe they would otherwise be committing murder by engaging in the practice of abortion.
“Religious freedom is a bedrock value of our society but, on President Obama’s watch, this time-honored principle is under assault. That is why our bill offers full exemption from the HHS mandate and provides needed legal protections for healthcare entities who refuse to partake in the barbaric practice of abortion,” said House lead sponsor Rep. Black in a press release. “As a nurse for more than 40 years, I am proud to introduce this legislation that will safeguard the conscience rights of every American and ensure that more unborn lives can be saved in the process.”
“This is a seminal moment for those who support religious liberty and the rights of conscience for all individuals. Congress needs to move legislation to protect the rights of those who, for reasons of personal preference or religious conviction, choose not to get involved with providing abortions,” Weldon wrote in a Politico op-ed. “It’s time to codify my amendment and ensure that all health care providers have a right to action should any state or government insist they participate in the practice of abortion in any way.”
What opponents say
Opponents argue that the amendment endangers women’s health and erodes women’s autonomy.
“The Federal Refusal Clause gives health-care corporations license to interfere with a doctor’s ability to provide comprehensive health information to patients, thus undermining the doctor-patient relationship; Jeopardizes women’s lives; [and] restricts low-income women’s access to necessary reproductive-health care,” says NARAL Pro-Choice America.
“[It] imposes barriers to abortion care, especially for low-income women and women of color; Impinges on states’ ability to protect women’s health; [and] costs states billions of dollars through the loss of all health, education, and labor-related funds if they violate the misguided law.”
Why now?
Attention has been particularly drawn to the issue this summer over a fight in California. The state had required all its health insurance plans to include abortion coverage, prompting complaints that the state should forfeit their right to any federal funds. But in June, the Obama Administration’s Department of Health and Human Services rejected that claim.
“There is no healthcare entity protected under the [right of conscience] statute that has asserted religious or moral objections to abortion and therefore there is no covered entity that has been subject to discrimination within the meaning of the Weldon Amendment,” said Jocelyn Samuels, director of the Office for Civil Rights at HHS.
Weldon, who crafted the amendment back in 2005, disagrees. (It does not appear that Obama himself has personally weighed in on the issue.)
Odds of passage
The House bill has 160 cosponsors, 158 Republicans and two Democrats: Rep. Daniel Lipinski (D-IL3) and Rep. Collin Peterson (D-MN7). It has not yet received a vote in either the House Ways and Means Committee or the House Energy and Commerce Committee. The Senate bill has 25 cosponsors, all Republican. It has yet to receive a vote in the Senate Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Committee.
A prior version of the bill in the previous Congress didn’t receive a vote either, and that was with an even larger 195 cosponsors.
This article was written by GovTrack Insider staff writer Jesse Rifkin.


Why the internet of things could put some insurance companies out of business
The impact the internet of things (IoT) will have on the insurance industry is explored in a fascinating article in TechCrunch called “How IoT will change our relationship with insurance”, and looks at the way that our car, fridge, garage door, thermostat, and just about anything else you can think of, will provide information that tech-savvy insurers will be able to use to offer more attractive and competitive packages to their customers.
In fact, private health insurers already work on a similar basis, using test results, medical reports, and other medical information.
But of course health insurers cannot legally use this data to offer better prices based on gender, age, or the costs incurred by the client over time. As more and more of us start wearing devices to measure key health indicators such as heart rate, exercise, or the amount of hours we sleep, some insurers, particularly those that have added “wellbeing” to health, are looking at the possibility of working with their customers using a data base of such information to offer new or more attractive services, but face the same problem: the customer must trust that this data will not be used as an excuse to increase premiums. This is a complex issue, given the asymmetric nature of the relationship between insured and insurer, but that will inevitably create winners and losers in the insurance sector, where customer trust is the true competitive advantage.
I have taken out a number of different insurance policies over the years: health, motor, home, life, accident and injury… and if one things is clear to me it is that some companies were there to make life easier for me, while others went out of their way to avoid having to pay up. In some cases it may be that the fault lies with overly zealous employees, but I can tell you that I won’t be using their services any time soon, however exciting their offer. As said, it’s a question of trust.
There are insurance companies out there that should be reported for fraud and deliberately misleading people. It would actually be quite easy to identify them, simply by putting together a ranking: those that “mysteriously” and consistently end up paying out less in the different categories are obviously going to be those that do their best to introduce loopholes and clauses to get out of paying. I have even considered setting up a website that would invite people to detail their experiences with insurance companies, describing what happened, the policy that supposedly covered them, and the outcome, negative or positive. Such a site would be of great use to us all, something along the lines of TripAdvisor or others in the tourism sector.

In a world increasingly filled with sensors thanks to the IoT, we find ourselves in the same situation again: insurers will have to prove to their customers that the information obtained from these sensors will be used in their favor, and not against them. One thing is preventing fraud, another is trying to avoid paying out on the basis of information the client provides in good faith when signing the contract. In the IoT scenario, insurers that are unable to win their customers’ trust and are seen as trying to avoid payouts, will find that none of their customers will use sensors, believing that the information will be used against them. Other companies will use the information from sensors but continue to be seen as allies of their customers, ready to help in times of difficulty.
An IoT world is going to be one awash with information, and as we know, knowledge is power. When it comes to convincing customers to use their services, we are going to need to know that that knowledge is empowering us, and that it will strengthen our case, and that the insurer will respect the contract accordingly. Companies that look for short-term gains will lose their customers’ trust, and in an interconnected world, that could make life very difficult for them.
(En español, aquí)

How Data Insurance Might Have Prevented The Ashley Madison Hack
It’s all over the news today: Ashley Madison, a dating site used by unfaithful married people to cheat on their spouses, was breached and the data on all of its subscribers was stolen by hackers. The hackers, unusually, aren’t demanding money. They’re demanding that the service either shut down or all of the data will be publicized.
Now, let’s just say that it’s hard for most people to feel sorry for either the owners of Ashley Madison or its customers. “Karma is a bitch” was my first thought at reading news of the breach. But this incident highlights a fairly serious problem that not nearly enough people take seriously. If your business depends on proprietary information, failing to protect it could legitimately put you out of business. This might not happen overnight in a public and dramatic incident, but CEOs should view the risk as akin to the risk of embezzlement. Losing the data that gives you a competitive edge can be even more harmful than losing the contents of your bank account, and the loss is a lot harder to track.
If you’re a business with something to lose, you can usually insure against it. For example, you can buy liability insurance, business interruption insurance, and fire insurance. While there is some insurance coverage available to assist business owners in the event of data breaches, it’s pretty limited in scope and doesn’t come with strict requirements. So most businesses don’t carry it, if they’re even aware that such coverage exists. It’s truly astonishing how massive a gap this is.
One of the biggest drivers of fire safety in America is insurance requirements. There are legal requirements too, which often go hand-in-hand. One of my jobs at Microsoft involved managing 9 separate IT labs scattered around campus, and I got to know the Redmond Fire Marshal pretty well. I think I may have been the only Microsoft lab manager in history never to be fined (I ran a pretty tight ship). If you want to avoid fines and prevent cancellation of your fire insurance, you need to have fire extinguishers, smoke alarms, and a sprinkler system. You’ll need to perform regular fire drills to make sure that everyone knows how to evacuate safely. And this presents a very real cost. People will roll their eyes but at the end of the day, they’ll comply with the requirements. Think about it: roughly 4 times a year, almost every business in America shuts down the whole company for an hour to meet fire insurance requirements and nobody really questions this. Everyone understands that complying with fire safety requirements is just a cost of doing business and while the interruption is annoying, people shrug it off and move forward. And they’re sure glad that everything works when it is needed! You’ll never hear a real argument in the executive suite about the cost of keeping fire extinguisher certifications up-to-date, or inspecting the fire sprinklers. It’s a routine matter, because even if it’s not a legal requirement, it’s an insurance requirement. And nobody would seriously consider running a business without fire insurance. The same is true for insurance requirements around industry-standard financial controls and physical security. You need to lock up the money and watch it carefully so nobody steals it. Everybody clearly understands this.
However, if you’re an IT manager implementing information security best practices, there are often howls of protest. Nobody questions locking the door to the computer room, but just try to lock up the data inside the computers. In every IT management job I’ve held, there was a security policy, and then there were the exceptions — and there were a lot of exceptions. And I didn’t really have anything to say about it unless there were legal requirements that carried a risk of fines or jail. Sarbanes-Oxley compliance? That stuff always got done, because the CFO had a seat in every board meeting and a personal risk of going to jail if it wasn’t done. But the risk of data breaches? Chances are your CISO doesn’t have a regular seat at the table during board meetings, and even if present, the legal risks of bad security practices are minimal. “Updating our security program is really important,” she will say. “It’s in line with industry best practices. Bad things could happen if we don’t.” There will be smiles and nods while the funding is again declined. “Thanks! Great presentation. Sorry it’s not in the budget this time. Maybe we’ll reconsider next year.”
Is Ashley Madison enough of a wake-up call? I think it could be, but it’s probably going to be up to the insurance industry to drive this. There is a definite gap in the marketplace for meaningful insurance against data breaches, and given the massive (potentially even fatal) costs of breaches, this is surprising. However, the gap exists for a good reason: actuaries need to be able to accurately calculate their risk, and this is very difficult to do in information security programs. Every shop has a unique combination of information systems and information security programs, which may or may not be effectively followed in practice. However, it doesn’t necessarily need to be this way. Most (not all) breaches can be effectively prevented with a robust information security program in line with industry standards, and the majority of this stuff can be boiled down to checklists that can be audited. This is already the case with PCI compliance and Sarbanes-Oxley. Although information security and IT professionals often resist cookie-cutter approaches, these actually work (nothing has done more to stop viruses and malware than Microsoft changing the Windows Update default to automatic updates) and what’s more, they’re much more easily enforced with the move to cloud architectures. There has never been a better time, and there has also never been a more urgent time, to create and enforce effective information security standards.
Insurance is perhaps the most boring business on earth, but the industry wields a huge amount of influence when it comes to making our world safer. Manufactured goods that use electricity are now much safer because Underwriters’ Laboratories has a strict set of insurance requirements before they can be certified. Fewer fires happen than in the past, they’re put out more quickly, and more people are safely evacuated because the insurance industry has driven dramatic improvements in fire safety. And cars are much safer today than in the past, largely because the auto insurance industry has driven safety initiatives. However, there is no Underwriters’ Laboratories for software. There is no Fire Marshal of information security. Instead, there is a person called the CISO whose job is largely to be blamed and fired for failing to force people to do what she has no real power to require. As an industry, we can — and must — do better. We need a Trojan horse to introduce better practices that stick, and the availability of data insurance might just be the Trojan horse that allows information security practices to evolve.
About the author: I’m the founder of Cuddli and previously worked in a variety of senior global IT roles at Microsoft. I’m interested in technology that keeps people and their data safe without slowing business down. Feel free to reach out if I can help you.

When Should You Buy Rental Car Insurance?

Traditional rental car companies often aggressively push rental car insurance on their customers at the rental car counter. However, if you ask the salesperson what they cover and why you need them, chances are they will not know the answer.
The reason for this practice is that these companies earn a large profit margin on these “counter products”, as they are colloquially known. Skurt, unlike rental car companies, does not have a counter and while we do offer these products, there is never any pressure for you to purchase them. Rather, they are offered as protection for our customers.
When driving a car, there are two main things for which you want to be covered. Cars are expensive assets and even a small fender bender can cost several thousands of dollars. Thus, most people elect to protect themselves from this risk by purchasing some sort of collision coverage. Secondly, if you cause damage or injury to a person and/or property while driving you may be liable to pay for the injuries and/or damage to a third party. People protect against this risk by purchasing liability insurance.
If you pay for your rental with a credit card and have your own car insurance policy, chances are you are covered for these risks. Most major credit cards will cover the damage you cause to a rental car. To be sure you are covered, call your credit card company to verify that you are in fact covered. If you do not have a credit card, or your credit card doesn’t cover you for this risk, Skurt offers a collision damage waiver (“CDW”). CDW is not insurance, but rather a promise by Skurt that if you cause damage to a vehicle, we will waive our right to pursue you for any such damages, subject to certain terms and conditions (i.e. damage caused while driving under the influence isn’t covered). The price of CDW varies depending on the type of vehicle.
Even if you don’t pay for your rental with a credit card, your personal auto insurance may cover you in the event of damage to your rental. Again, it is best to verify any such coverage with your insurance provider to guarantee that damage is covered. If you don’t pay with a credit card and don’t have personal auto insurance, it is in your best interest to purchase CDW. If you don’t, you will be held liable for damage you cause to these cars, which can result in you owing thousands of dollars. Even if you have coverage, you may choose to purchase CDW to avoid paying your deductible and/or avoid the hassle of filing a claim with your insurance.
If you rent a car and cause damage or injury to a third party, you will be held responsible for any such damage or injury. If you have personal auto insurance, it may cover you for liability to third parties. Again, it is best to check with your insurer to see if your insurance will cover you while driving a Skurt. If you do not have personal auto insurance (or don’t want to risk filing a claim with your own insurance), Skurt offers liability insurance. Skurt’s Renter’s Liability Insurance will provide you with the amount of liability insurance required by the State. If you don’t have a personal auto insurance policy or don’t purchase any insurance through Skurt (or another third party which offers coverage), and you are involved in an accident which causes injury or damage to a third party, you may be held personally responsible for the amount of damage you cause.
If you pay with a credit card and have a personal auto insurance policy for your own vehicle, chances are, you don’t need to purchase the products offered by rental car companies. But if you do not, it is important to protect yourself in the event of an accident by purchasing the insurance and/or CDW offered by Skurt.
By: Daniel F. Stea, Esq.
Corporate Counsel
Skurt, Inc.


“… was surprised to learn his home and auto insurance didn’t cover him when he was injured in a bike accident…” Really? Why would he have been surprised? He was not at home or driving a car. Should everyone get special “walking around” insurance and “riding BART” insurance to make sure they’re covered then, too?


28 InsuranceTech Companies That Are Shaking up the Trillion-Dollar Healthcare Industry
Read the full story here.
Health insurance is one of the most painful budget accounts for everyone. The greatest value and greatest weakness — human health is something that has built a trillion-dollar industry and the most complicated infrastructure around the world. One of the most massive and complex industries was bubbling till couple years ago when the talented tech workforce started questioning the status quo and decided to democratize insurance for those who can’t afford a basic necessity of having their health protected.
Even though lending and payments startups have been the hottest over the course of the FinTech revolution in terms of the number of companies that raised funds, we have been predicting that InsuranceTech is becoming a hot topic and sector for bright entrepreneurs to develop disruptive solutions. Investors also have been paying attention to the sector, as the insurance industry is the biggest industry in the US with net premiums of $1.1 trillion in 2014. There is already a range of InsuranceTech startups paving their way to a trillion-dollar industry, and HealthTech is an important sector to follow as it may completely change the way we look at health insurance in the near future.
Let’s look at some of the InsuranceTech companies disrupting a massive and extremely complex industry with amazing solutions.
Oscar
Oscar is a FinTech unicorn ($1.5 billion valuation) in the insurance space with notable investors like Google Ventures, Google Capital, Goldman Sachs, Khosla Ventures and others. Oscar aims to revolutionize insurance through data, technology and design.
Apply Now
Zenefits
Zenefits allows users to manage the whole HR — payroll, benefits (health insurance), compliance, and more in an online dashboard.
Collective Health
Collective Health is a technology company that works to create the healthcare experience everyone deserves. The insurer claims to have a complete health insurance solution to help the best companies in the US to take better care of their people.
GoHealth
GoHealth is an online portal for finding health insurance coverage, allowing users to compare health insurance quotes and make purchases online.
PokitDok
PokitDok is a cloud-based API platform designed to make healthcare transactions more efficient and streamline the business of health.
Maxwell Health
Maxwell Health is a fast-growing player in health IT as it is the first health-as-a-service platform (HaaS). The company’s revolutionary operating system for employee benefits engages employees, incentivizes a holistic view of health and provides a centralized place to access health and benefits services.

Gravie
Gravie helps consumers choose and buy insurance, pay for it and manage all health care expenses.
SimplyInsured
SimplyInsured provides group health insurance quotes that enable small businesses to estimate their real out-of-pocket costs.
PlanSource
PlanSource is a benefits-powered HCM platform that provides consumers, employers, brokers and carriers with limitless benefits. It offers PlanSource, a benefits administration technology that automates various benefits transactions and connects with the insurance carriers.
Lumity
Lumity enables businesses to make smart health plan and benefits decisions. With powerful insights and tools via a simple online dashboard, the company’s benefits consulting-in-a-box helps employers select and optimize health plans that fit employee needs — while driving cost savings and better outcomes for everyone.
Stride Health
Stride is the first health insurance recommendation engine tuned and tailored to the life of the individual: it helps to keep doctors, drugs and get apples-to-apples comparisons of health plans.
Array Health
Array Health is a leading provider of private insurance exchange technology. Its cloud-based software platform enables health plans of any size to power their own branded online exchanges — a strategic channel that helps them compete and thrive in the post-health-reform world.
HealthCare.com
HealthCare.com is an online healthcare search and comparison engine. It is called the “Kayak.com for health insurance.” The privately-owned HealthCare.com claims to be the nation’s leading unbiased search engine and comparison tool for health insurance plans. The website features over 120,000 plans, including all of the state-based exchange plans, federal exchange plans and many private, off-exchange plans.
Allay
Allay enables companies to work with the broker of their choice to do online, paperless health insurance purchasing, and full HR and benefits administration. Companies can ensure compliance with local and federal employment laws, have all their benefits plans in one place, and help employees understand their benefits and self-manage their HR information — everything online.
Bayzat
Bayzat is a Dubai-based medical insurance technology startup that offers plans from leading insurers, easy payment and powerful technology to access health benefits online.
Continue exploring more companies here.

Announcing AlphaRoot: Cannabis + Agriculture Insurance

The Founder Shield team has been busy. They’ve built a thriving insurance practice that continues to scale into new markets. Given their presence in the innovation economy the company has been experiencing a lot of demand for insurance in the cannabis and agricultural spaces, both markets which are undergoing massive transformations. To meet this need they quietly launched AlphaRoot in 2016.
AlphaRoot focuses on providing insurance solutions for cannabis and agriculture. The company stands out in its ability to tackle complicated situations. They specialize in helping the insurance see parallels between more traditional insurance solutions and the needs of cutting edge companies, bridging the gap of the more traditional insurance underwriters and the frontier of business.
The team is led by Jeff Samuels, a veteran in the industry. He’s off to the races, already serving an increasingly large share of the cannabis and AgTech companies in the US.
If you’re interested in learning more visit http://alpharoot.co


International InsurTech-Focused Accelerator Programs Aimed to Find the Uber of Insurance
Read the full story here.
InsurTech has a relatively young, but quite a vibrant history. There are already at least 80 hot InsurTech startups shaking up the trillion-dollar industry. It is needless to say that the insurance industry is one of the most massive and complex ecosystems with large and powerful corporate players already taking steps towards riding the wave of disruption. In fact, it is the biggest industry in the US with net premiums of $1.1 trillion in 2014. Insurance carriers and related activities contributed $421.4 billion, or 2.5% of the United States’ gross domestic product in 2013.
Since 2013, insurance tech has been actively taking off and creating its own niche in the market. In 2016, several incumbents are planning to disrupt the $4.5-trillion industry by leveraging technological capabilities. The use of disruptive technologies like big data, Internet of Things (IoT), mobile technology, AI, social network and blockchain are gaining momentum and InsurTech firms are looking for a scope to capitalize it.
The rapid growth of InsurTech startups, interest from VC firms and the corporate world served as a sign that the ecosystem has a tremendous potential and requires action to leverage those opportunities. In response to the flourishing startup environment, opportunistic minds have built InsurTech-focused accelerators to nourish the next big idea and the next Uber of insurance.
So if you are an entrepreneur or have your startup looking to drill into one of the deepest gold mines around the world, consider joining accelerators that have deep knowledge and expertise of working within insurance.
MundiLab powered by Munich RE
Mundi Lab is an insurance tech acceleration program, designed to facilitate the go-to-market of startups with innovative solutions for the insurance and reinsurance industries. Mundi Lab is divided in two phases:
Find out more here.
An intensive five-week program designed to take 10 selected teams in very diverse industries to the next level, and open infinite opportunities to them within the Insurance market (cash and equity free for participants). Within the phase, startups will be offered world-class mentoring from Munich Re and Mundi Ventures key people, engaging workshops to improve entrepreneurial toolkit, use of the company’s co-working facilities in Madrid, constant networking opportunities within the strong Madrid entrepreneurship community, networking opportunities with other world-class entrepreneurs and the vast network of Munich Re partners and clients, strong lineup of industry experts to hone your product and value proposition for the Insurance Tech industry.
Munich Re will choose the best performing companies that have proven the highest potential to disrupt the insurance industry. Within the phase, startups will be offered an opportunity to work on a pilot program with Munich Re, an opportunity to pitch their ideas at Munich RE demo day and access to key investors from European top VCs. Entrepreneurs will also have access to key decision-makers at Munich Re to learn how corporates think and take sourcing and partnership decisions.
W1 Forward InsurTech Accelerator
W1 Forward InsurTech Accelerator was launched by WERK1 together with leading insurance companies to establish one of the world’s leading ecosystems for InsurTech startups in Munich and help them boost the market.
The program will support up to five teams starting on June 20, 2016. The core program is set out for six months and is open to startups worldwide who want to revolutionize the industry. The first batch will consist of up to five startups. Teams will use WERK1 installations for free and work hand in hand with renowned coaches, mentors and leaders of the industry, all worth €80.000.
The aim is to help startups to collaborate with corporations so that they can find new businesses and partnerships. The program is free of charge. No team will be asked for equity.
W1 is looking for innovative concepts or projects that can change the way the insurance industry works. Whether startups are already in the industry or just have an idea that could be applied to it — W1 aims to make it big.
Among the partners of W1 are Allianz, Generali, Munich RE, Swiss RE, ARAG and others.
Global Insurance Accelerator
The Global Insurance Accelerator is a mentor-driven business accelerator designed to foster innovation in the insurance industry by supporting startups targeting the global insurance industry. GIA’s investors are insurance carriers and mentors are primarily insurance executives.
GIA is focused on early-stage companies who are building solutions that support the insurance industry. The accelerator provides seed funding, access to mentors, a desk in its office in Des Moines, 100-days of on-site support and time on stage at the Global Insurance Symposium to put the portfolio company in front of hundreds of insurance executives to demonstrate their product.
The Accelerator provides a $40K seed investment in exchange for a 6% equity. Startups are required to be in Des Moines during the program but are encouraged to do business-related travel as needed.
Global Insurance Accelerator is looking for startups who are attempting to solve key issues in non-competitive areas such as: fraud, security, risk management, distribution, data/sharing/security, reporting, regulation, device monitoring, actuarial, quoting and more. The GIA has several insurance companies who directly support the program through an investment of money, time and access.
Silicon Valley Insurance Accelerator
SVIA accelerates innovation in insurance by facilitating the flow of market and technology insight, relationships, and investment between the established industry and our ecosystems of innovative technology, InsurTech startups and venture firms in Silicon Valley and other global innovation hubs.
After a few months with the Insurance Innovation Program, startups are provided with access to an innovation network, conferences, reports, and executive round tables. They are offered a powerful, cost-effective way to accelerate the process of education, new partnerships and cultural change within their organization.
For more detailed information on the SVIA program, contact the support team.
InsurTech Accelerator by Swiss RE in Bangalore
InsurTech Accelerator is a 16-week intensive program taking place in Bangalore, India, beginning July 2016. This program will mentor and help curate startups aimed at disrupting insurance practices. Swiss RE claims it to be the first-ever initiative by a reinsurance company to foster technology innovation amongst startups in the insurance tech area in India.
In this program, startups will have the opportunity to engage with Swiss RE leaders and have access to Swiss RE’s expertise. The rigorous program will enable startups to make an impact in the insurance industry, which is at the cusp of disruptive transformation.
The accelerator is currently seeking applications from ambitious and extraordinary startups with a focus on innovative insurance solutions and practices, who are building a game changing company in the following areas:
Internet of Things (home, industrial, health and motor)
Systems of engagement (innovative distribution channels and models, digital assistants/ robo-advisors etc.)
Smart analytics (across insurance value chain)
For the first batch, up to five startups will be selected into the program. The accelerator program is open to both early-stage and venture-backed technology startups with a vision to impact and challenge the way the insurance industry sector works.
During the program, startups will have access to global expertise and insights from the Swiss RE team, strong mentoring support from global thought leaders, and technical enablement to work effectively from the Swiss RE Bangalore office. At the end of 16 weeks, the selected startups will present their learnings and achievements to our ecosystem partners, potential investors and a panel of judges.
Additional program benefits include:
Engagement with global reinsurance leader
Opportunity to work for global markets/business topics
State of the art facility located in Bangalore
3+1 months of office space
Invitation to participate in industry related events
Startupbootcamp InsurTech London
Startupbootcamp InsurTech London focuses on Disruptive Insurance Innovation with aim to provide 10 startups with the funding, mentorship and office space to design unique propositions that meet the needs of the insurance market.
The programme is located in the City of London, near London’s Square Mile — the heart of the powerful financial district. Startups will be provided with access to a global network of institutions, a rich pool of market experts, mentors, angel investors and VCs. Over a three-month period, these startups will team up with insightful professionals dedicated to the industry.
Among the major partners are Allianz, ERGO/ Munich Re, Intesa SanPaolo, Lloyds Banking Group, PwC, Route66 Ventures, Swiss Re, and others. Partners will provide the expertise, market exposure, integration as well as access to a network of company professionals that most early-stage insurance startups would not be able to access otherwise.
The benefits of the program include:
Extensive mentorship from hundreds of entrepreneurs, investors and partners
Access to top markets in Europe, US and APAC
The ability to test and refine propositions in a safe environment and learn to employ the techniques used by the most successful startups in this world
3+1 months free office space
€15K in cash per team
€500k+ in partner services
Exposure to 200+ Angels and VCs
Invitation to SBC global alumni network and growth program
In return, Startupbootcamp asks for a 6% equity stake with all contracts being simple, transparent, and available for all to see.
Continue reading here.


Insurance Is The Next Frontier For Fintech
We have entered a golden age for fintech. LendingClub and OnDeck recently exited through massive IPOs, and global investments in the fintech space hit $3 billion last year. This outpouring of innovation and investment has spread across the financial sector, spanning mobile banking, small business lending, financial advisers, credit scoring, savings and more.
Given all the money flowing into fintech, it might seem that the biggest, most glaring problems have been solved. And yet, despite the unbelievable amount of financial innovation and technological progress that have transformed other sectors, there are entire swaths of the financial industry that have not changed. The opportunities are still ripe for the picking.
Insurance represents a huge opportunity that has yet to see real innovation. The U.S. insurance industry is the largest in the world in terms of revenue, with net premiums surpassing $1.2 trillion. At the same time, the major players have some of the lowest Net Promoter Score (NPS) ratings of any industry, meaning the companies do not inspire satisfaction or loyalty in their customers.
People do not like or trust insurance companies. And it’s no wonder why, with headlines like “9/11 Responders With Rare Cancer Denied Insurance Coverage” and “Sandy Homeowners Systematically Denied Insurance Claims.” The industry is notoriously rife with moral hazard and fraud.
Add to all of this the antiquated way insurance products are delivered to consumers in a world where almost anything can be procured with a few taps of a smartphone screen, and it’s no wonder that most Americans are underinsured. Less than half of “middle market consumers” aged 25 to 64 have individual life insurance coverage, and 40 percent of those Americanswho do have life insurance coverage think they do not have enough. And, 64 percent of American homes are underinsured.
The insurance industry is begging for disruption.
Challenges And Opportunities
Outside of the Affordable Care Act, next to nothing has changed in the insurance industry for years. Why has it been so slow to change? To start, there are high barriers to entry. The insurance industry is complex and expensive from a regulatory standpoint.
New carriers are required to have unencumbered stores of cash to satisfy the regulators, and have to grow those unencumbered assets in proportion to the amount of risk they have underwritten, which is ever-increasing.
This challenge is far worse in insurance than in lending. In addition, for some lines of insurance, pricing is regulated at the state level, with regulators controlling how much a company charges for a given product. For all these reasons, it is a difficult and slow process to bring a new insurance product to market in the U.S.
Then there is the adverse selection problem — the first people who need a new product often are the highest risk, and thus you run the risk of seeing much higher claims than the industry average once you launch. For a startup, this is just when you are the youngest and most vulnerable.
A few brave souls have taken an early crack at this market and seen success — most notably, Oscar and Metromile. Oscar is “a better kind of health insurance company” that aims to use technology and design to improve the experience.The company is now valued at a whopping $1.5 billion, just a year-and-a-half after its launch. Metromile sells pay-per-mile car insurance, which appeals to the 70 percent of people who drive under 10,000 miles a year, and thus probably overpay for car insurance.
Both companies offer intuitive and accessible (mobile) user interfaces, consumer-friendly business models and greater transparency. This is just the tip of iceberg — every line of insurance needs to be “millennialized,” and I expect we’ll see huge disruption in home, life and P&C, just to name a few.
However, the biggest opportunities for startups will be in four areas: new products for a new economy, better insights from better data, new ways of managing risk and funding regulatory capital and new structures for acquiring customers.
With the rise of Uber, Airbnb and others, our economy is moving away from owning assets to renting them. Existing policies offered by big insurers don’t handle these new use cases and will have to be replaced. But the bigger shift is that in this new world, the concept of insuring an asset over many periods is outdated; instead, we will move to a more transactional consumption model: just-in-time insurance delivered on mobile and underwritten in seconds. One upcoming company in this area is SURE, which is going to deliver consumer-facing insurance products at the push of a button.
There are also reams more data available today than 10 years ago, which means new ways to underwrite risk. For example, Apple watches and FitBits provide information and insight into people’s daily activity that can be extremely useful when making health assessments.
And in the auto industry, a huge risk is how far and through what geography an individual drives to work each day. While accelerometers have been around for years, every cell phone now has a GPS, which provides far more accurate and detailed data.
New insurance companies are tackling the capital requirement challenges in a number of interesting ways. Oscar raised a huge first round of capital, and has continued raising large rounds — driven in part by the need for regulatory capital.
Others are taking a page from online lending and adopting peer-to-peer models to try to provide the requisite capital for regulators. We’ve seen a lot of folks take this approach internationally (Friendsurance in Germany, for example) and others are taking the same approach here — I’m interested to see how regulators react in the U.S.
Finally, the insurance industry is begging for new ways to acquire customers. Millennials are shockingly underinsured. This is partly because they simply do not want to talk to someone on the phone. The channels they like to use and those with which they are most comfortable are not the channels on which insurance companies try to reach them. As a result, a huge target demographic is underserved.
PolicyGenius is already showing that they can convert this previously un-convertible population by providing better information and education online.
I am bullish on the future of insurance startups. Yes, there are challenges, but every problem worth solving comes with challenges, and the insurance industry is crying out for change. People were skeptical at first that consumers would ever trust startups, rather than banks, with their financial needs, or that startups would be able to affect change in such a conservative, entrenched and powerful industry. That turned out to be wrong, and incumbent banks are now realizing that they have to innovate to stay alive, making acquisitions and partnerships left and right.
Similarly in the insurance industry, I don’t think the innovation will come from within. I think that startups will create the opportunities, and force insurance companies to turn their slow wheels of change.

Obamacare Helped The Sickest Americans Gain Insurance, Huge Study Confirms
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
By Bryan Dewan
A new report released Tuesday from the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association underscores the need for the Affordable Care Act’s reforms, finding evidence that the health law effectively expanded coverage to America’s most vulnerable citizens.
According to the data, Obamacare’s newest policyholders were more likely to have a variety of significant health problems — in other words, reasons that insurers might have denied them coverage before the Affordable Care Act was passed.
Newly enrolled policyholders were twice as likely to have diabetes, twice as likely to have Hepatitis C, and three times as likely to have HIV. They also had higher instances of high blood pressure, diabetes, depression, and coronary artery disease. Hospital admission rates were 84 percent higher for these policyholders, and the frequency of their doctor and specialist visits were 26 percent higher.
“It’s no surprise that people who newly gained access to coverage under the Affordable Care Act needed health care. That’s why they were locked out of coverage before,” Ben Wakana, a spokesman for the Department of Health and Human Services, remarked.
The Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association study is significant due to the sheer size of claims data analyzed. Since Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans are purchased across the country, researchers had access to claims for 4.7 million people. About one-third of those studied had been continuously enrolled since 2013; the others signed up in 2014 or 2015.
The report also found that the influx of sicker, previously uninsured patients into the health insurance system is contributing to a rise in insurance premiums nationwide. The increased need for care is driving insurance costs up, even as many people are receiving better care.
Thanks to Obamacare, Americans now have greater access to private health insurance plans through the law’s new individual marketplaces, as well as protection against insurance companies denying them coverage based on pre-existing medical conditions.
Since the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010, the percentage of uninsured citizens has dropped considerably. Nearly 9 in 10 American adults now have health insurance, and the law has helped to close the health insurance gap between low-income people and wealthier Americans.
Bryan Dewan is an Intern at ThinkProgress.


Can you transform insurance from the outside?
Preface: Yoav Farbey speaks to Estonian insurance entrepreneur Risto Rossar, CEO of [Insly], about disrupting the insurance industry, the future of finance and how to make an impact when approaching insurance from the outside.
Risto Founder of Insly
Risto, please talk to us about your entrepreneurial journey in the insurance industry.
I have been in insurance for 15 years when I established an insurance brokerage company in Estonia. We started to sell insurance purely on the internet and so it was not very traditional. We compared prices, issued the policies and managed all the administration on behalf of insurance companies. Of course, back in 2000, insurance sales on the internet didn’t really pick up very quickly. In order for us to survive we had to sell through other channels, such as car dealers, leasing companies and gas stations. We managed to deploy the same technology that we had built for our internet sales platform, with some small modifications, in order for them to fit into these channels that already sold insurance. In doing so, we increased the efficiency of sales processes considerably.
However, two years ago we made the decision to take the technology out of the broker company and to start selling the technology to other brokers and agents, globally — this is how Insly was born. The main reason we did this is because the insurance broker business is not very scalable. You need to know the local market and people. We were already the biggest in the Baltic state and we could not grow much more.
When you say local do you mean country?
Yes, it is quite country specific. Sales are done locally and you need to know local insurance market and insurers. Each country is different and its difficult to scale the insurance broker business geographically. There is no insurance broker company that has grown organically to become global player, all have achieved it through M&A deals. You still need to know the people in the industry in each country.
What made you commit to taking this technology to London?
The trigger that made us come to London was when we noticed that the technological level within the brokerages are low.
Despite having clients from twenty different countries, we really put special focus on London. We are physically selling there, meeting with clients and making outbound phone calls. In other countries, we are only dealing with inbound requests. The reason that we are more active in London is because it is the centre of the insurance world. Our clients in London do business globally, so our technology gets spread globally. For example one of our clients, BDB, is selling Lloyds products in Italy. Several hundreds of brokers in Italy are now using our platform to sell Lloyds products but yet we didn’t need to sell directly to the Italian brokers.
We also believe that being able to sell in London, gives us a ‘quality stamp.’ It gives us credibility and makes it easier to sell to other countries. If London brokers trust us then so will people elsewhere.
Finally, we took part in the Startup Bootcamp accelerator, which gave us valuable relationships within London FinTech scene and really helped us to grow our business.
Cumulatively, these factors meant we stayed here permanently.
Do you think someone who is not in insurance broking can create a startup that can disrupt the industry?
It should be mostly the case because when I established my original company IIZI, I came from the banking and investment world not from insurance. Being an outsider also means that it will help you look at that world with a different perspective. People think that insurance is very complicated, simply because it is communicated to be so. However, when you start to ask questions, there is not much that is complicated. The only thing that is complicated is other people making it complicated to understand. People should not be scared to come in when they don’t have an insurance background.
Looking to future, where do you want to see Insly go?
Our view is that Insly should be software that is widely used in the insurance broker sector, globally. We want to digitalise the entire industry. We see that as our mission or goal.
What is the future of financial insurance industry?
I wish people would take an insurance company, disassemble it and put it together again with the goal that everything can be solved with technology — maybe even eliminating human employees altogether. The goal would be to create an insurance company that is 100% digital. However, that vision requires lot of money, perhaps even in the millions, which is difficult for any startup to raise.
If you were speaking to someone interested in starting their own business, what advice would you give?
Don’t overthink things. Just start executing. You don’t get it right in the beginning anyway. Fix problems along the way. Business is quite simple, you don’t need to be very smart, you just need to start doing. The journey will be your teacher.
Originally published at thestartupmag.com on October 27, 2015.

AOL and American Family Insurance sign virtual reality video partnership
Photo credit: Oculus
AOL announced a content creation and distribution partnership campaign with American Family Insurance (AFI) and the media agency Mindshare. The campaign is aimed to leverage the capabilities of AOL’s recently purchased VR and 360-degree video production company RYOT.
According to CNBC, a spokesperson for AOL said the partnership deal was worth seven figures.
The series will focus on individuals overcoming their challenges and pursuing their dreams.
“At American Family we believe dreams are the most important things anyone will ever own. It’s why we’re so excited to use 360° video and virtual reality to bring to life stories of everyday dreamers who are pursuing their passions” says Telisa Yancy, CMO, American Family Insurance in an official press release.
AOL and RYOT’s full-suite of new ad solutions and services will include:
A dedicated editorial platform on The Huffington Post, celebrating, rewarding, and recognizing individuals who are passionately pursuing their dreams.
A three-part branded video series that will highlight the men and women who relentlessly pursued their dreams and achieved happiness and success as a result of being fearless.
The 360° video series will be accessible across screens and enable viewers to experience the action on the HuffPost RYOT app or through a VR headset.
AOL research around the development of metrics for 360°/VR consumer and advertiser engagement.
According to AOL, the campaign will run from late October until the end of the year.
Follow us on Medium to discover the latest trends on Virtual Reality

The insane health insurance situation in Australia with 457 Visa & reciprocal Medicare
I think it is finally dawning on me just how screwed up the laws & rules around health insurance are in Australia if you are a temporary resident on a 457 visa.. especially if you are on a reciprocal Medicare arrangement. Let me try to explain.
Public vs Private Health Care
Coming from the Netherlands where they have only healthcare, no distinction between public and private this is a little bit strange. But basically it comes down to you can have ok health care for free* through Medicare, or you can have good healthcare for a thousand dollar or two a year. Well, if you are a Permanent Resident or an Australian Citizen of course. As a temporary resident you get nothing obviously..
Unless you are from a country where they have a reciprocal agreement with in which case you can get Medicare for free*. So we are ok. We fall under the reciprocal Medicare agreement so we are covered like a regular Australian right? Well.. almost. Except for community health nurses for our baby check-ups & vaccinations.. or possibly certain types of ultrasound & other scans and no one knows what other exceptions there are. Oh and every doctor we have seen so far charges about twice the rate Medicare refunds.
* free: Not actually free, you pay a 1.45% Medicare Levy charge through your taxes. This becomes important later.
Overseas Visitor Cover
So if we want a) proper insurance & b) the best healthcare we have to get additional insurance on top of Medicare.. except we are not allowed to use those. But but.. there is a special Overseas Visitor Covers from multiple health insurers which basically come in 2 variants: Pretty much the same as reciprocal Medicare, or a more comprehensive package. But what if you already have reciprocal Medicare? I hear you ask. You can choose which scheme you want to claim with, either one will work. But not both obviously.
So if we want extra health insurance we not only have to pay for Medicare through the Medicare Levy, but also pay for exactly the same privilege to a private health insurer.
But it gets worse.. much worse
If only that were the end of the story. There is also a thing called the Medicare Levy Surcharge (MLS). Basically it is a fine for making too much money and not taking out private health insurance. Once you make above a certain amount of money you pay between 1% and 1.5% tax if you don’t have appropriate cover. That Overseas Visitor Cover? Yeah, that is not appropriate..
But but? Yeah I know..
Aha.. but luckily we can always take out a policy meant for permanent Australian residents/citizens and use that to make the MLS to away.
But Erwin, earlier you said you weren’t allowed to use those?!
Yes I did. We aren’t allowed to use them, but are allowed to buy one. Buying one is all we need to do to get rid of the Medicare Levy Surcharge.
So what does it mean?
As far as I can tell we will be paying for health insurance thrice if we want good health insurance. Once through the Medicare Levy, once for Overseas Visitors Cover and one for either the MLS or a useless policy.
We tried to get an exemption for paying the Medicare Levy before, which should also get rid of the MLS, but they did not approve of that request back then. We will try again.


My Health Insurance Is Making Me Sick

I spent four hours today trying to straighten out the problems with my health insurance account, getting the runaround and being pushed back and forth between Florida Blue and Healthcare.gov.
I was informed in October that the insurance plan I had last year wouldn’t be offered in 2016, so they were putting me in their new shitty HMO, the cleverly-named ‘MyBlue’. The extra added benefit was that my primary care physician doesn’t take that insurance. In order to stick with my doctor, I’d have to shell out an addition $500 a month for a plan she’s on. An additional feature that came with this plan was the requirement that all my prescriptions be filled at either Navarro (? never heard of it) or CVS (lucky me).
Not having that kind of money to spare these days, I resigned myself to the fact that I’d have to find a new doctor. That was bad enough, but you ain’t heard nothin’ yet.
I went to fill a prescription the other day. It’s generic thyroid medication, and under this new plan, my cost should be $5, but I was charged $16.
So today, after my show, I thought I’d take a few minutes to call Florida Blue and find out why. But somehow, the claims department couldn’t even find the claim!
So I pulled up my account on floridablue.com and lo and behold, they have me enrolled in TWO plans. Even though I presented my NEW insurance card at CVS with the new policy number on it, somehow they put the claim under the old policy (which shouldn’t have even gone through as it’s expired!).
The Florida Blue rep who answered after I waited over 30 minutes said she couldn’t help me, so I asked to speak with a supervisor. When she was (allegedly) transferring me, the call dropped. Keep in mind that each time I had to call back, it involved at least 30 minutes of waiting on hold until a human being picked up the phone.
When I finally got back through, the next person I spoke with said I needed billing. But the person in billing said I had to call the exchange.
Are you feeling the frustration yet? I thought so.
So, I called the exchange, and waited and waited, only to get a clueless rep on the phone. When I asked to speak with a supervisor, I was conveniently disconnected again. (I truly believe they do this on purpose. Instead of getting a supervisor they just hang up so they don’t have to deal with a problem situation.)
When I finally got through to a supervisor at healthcare.gov, she said it was a Florida Blue problem, and she couldn’t get into their system to change anything. When I begged her to pick up the phone to talk with someone over there to get it straightened out, she said they couldn’t do that, but she could escalate a ticket digitally.
If I didn’t tell her to fuck off at that point, I certainly felt like it.
So, here I was, incredulous about the fact that 20% of my premium dollars go to administrative costs at Florida Blue, but every time I call, I have to wait at least 30 minutes to get my call answered.
But I figured I’d give it one last shot. In my case, the umpteenth time and the fourth hour was a charm.
By this time, I realized that it had to be a fuck-up on the part of the insurance company. Even though my former policy was no longer in effect, it was still linked to my account. The idiots at CVS didn’t bother to check that the account they put the prescription through actually matched the number on the card I handed them, so they put it through the wrong one!
I thought I’d approach it differently this time. I went right to the billing department where, after waiting the requisite 33 minutes, a nice man named Richard asked if he could help me. I told him he had no idea how much I hoped he could.
This time, I made it simple. I said that, for some reason, my old expired & discontinued policy was still showing up as active on my account, along with my new policy, creating all kinds of problems. He asked if he could put me on hold to look into it, and I just made him promise he wouldn’t cut me off before I said yes.
When he returned, he apologized for the wait and said he’d be able to take care of it! Of course, he’ll have to escalate his own ticket, but he said it should all be taken care of in 2–3 days.
I’m sitting here wondering why
I couldn’t have gotten that guy on the phone in the first place
With all the money Florida Blue and the rest of the for-profit health insurance government-sanctioned extortionists make, they can’t won’t hire enough staff to adequately service their clients
If you get disconnected they won’t call you back, even though they just asked for your phone number so you know they have it
None of these crooks are ever accountable for the shit they put us through on a daily basis
Seriously, after FOUR FUCKING HOURS trying to get my old, expired policy off my account so that I can use the new policy I’m paying for, I’m now sick. Mentally and physically ill from the stress that built up in me during those four frustrating hours.
Regular listeners of my show know that I suffer from depression. It gets debilitating when I’m hit by a particularly tough episode. And thanks to my insurance company, I’m in the middle of one right now.
Yes. My insurance company and this insane system of government-sanctioned extortion for healthcare quite literally made me sick today. And the only cure in sight comes from Bernie Sanders and his fight for Medicare for All. Let’s put the crooks out of business and make healthcare a right instead of a privilege.
As of now, I will not be doing a show tomorrow. I will take a mental health day and prepare myself for the hassle that will undoubtedly greet me tomorrow afternoon as I have my first appointment with my new insurance-company dictated primary care physician.
Oh joy. I can’t wait.
Nicole Sandler hosts The Nicole Sandler Show at radioornot.com

The Future of Insurance — Podcast
Insurance is an area that increasingly is being disrupted by startups. In the latest Seedcamp Podcast we interview Ernesto Suarez, CEO of Halo Insurance Services, and Nikolaus Sühr, CEO and Co-Founder of Seedcamp’s own KASKO, to discuss the future of insurance tech. The insurance market, like the financial and property markets, is poised for startups to shake up the status quo — and they already are! In this conversation, the three discuss what is happening in the space, the key players emerging across the sector and what we can expect to see in the coming years.
Ernesto Suarez has over 20 years’ experience in insurance. In 2009, he launched Halo Insurance Services Limited, an award winning online insurance broker, specialising in non-standard vehicle. Its retail brand, iCarhireinsurance.com, is now a leading provider of specialist car hire excess, offering policies which are up to 70% cheaper than the cover offered at the rental desks. Halo also now operates websites in the USA (Insuremyrentalcar.com), Germany (Leihwagenversicherung.de), France (Assurancelocationvoiture.fr), Spain (Aseguramicochedealquiler.es) and the Netherlands (Huurautoverzekering.com). Ernesto has an MBA in General Management from IESE Business School and a Bachelor of Science in Economics and Entrepreneurship from Babson College in Wellesley, Mass. USA.
Nick Sühr has over 8 years experience in insurance intermediation, product development, and strategy. In 2015, he co-founded KASKO, a digital insurance intermediary offering insurance as a Service. KASKO helps digital brands to offer the right insurance products to their customers via an API. Nick has a family background in insurance, studied Management at Nottingham University and finished has a MSc in Insurance and Risk Management from Cass Business School. Upon graduation, he worked in business development for Funk Gruppe in Hamburg (Top 3 Commercial Insurance Broker in Germany), worked in the family business, the market leads for classic and premium carinsurance in DACH as head of business development & marketing. Afterwards, he moved into financial strategy consulting for zeb, Germany’s best-ranked consultancy for financial services.
Deep Dive into Insurance Tech

Connected Insurance Technology Overview
A deep dive look at the connected insurance technology sector, providing an insurance startup map, trends/insights, and relevant company profile examples. You can see this post on our blog at http://www.venturescanner.com/blog/2016/connected-insurance-technology-overview

We are currently tracking 981 Insurance Technology companies in 14 categories across 53 countries, with a total of $16.5 Billion in funding. Click here to learn more about the full Insurance Technology landscape report and database.

Pay-as-you-go insurance for the infrequent driver
Cuvva offers pay-as-you-go car insurance
DISRUPTORS: The ideas changing industries
How would you like to pay for car insurance only when you plan on driving? Scottish start-up Cuvva offers a cheap, flexible and app-based alternative to traditional policies that require a monthly or annual payment — an arrangement that doesn’t make sense for infrequent drivers.
Targeted at people who rack up fewer than 4,000 miles per year, Cuvva requires a small subscription fee and then you’re free to top-up only when you need to drive, from as little as £1.20 per hour. The creators claim the app could save infrequent drivers up to £1,500 per year, while maintaining the perks of traditional car insurance like a no claims discount. “Pay-as-you-go insurance is a long overdue product in the UK, where increasingly the trend is for drivers to use their cars less and less,” says Ophelia Brown, general partner at LocalGlobe, an investor in Cuvva.

Gen Y is the largest generation since the Boomers, but they have almost no relationship with the insurance industry — partly because the sector has yet to deliver a solution that really speaks to them. “They consider insurance a complex financial transaction and they don’t feel they understand it well enough,” says Shane Cassidy, head of property and casualty insurance at Capgemini. “What they do expect is that the insurer knows them; they expect a lot from the automated side.” But offerings like Cuvva demonstrate that the industry is flexible, and more than capable of catering to a new generation of needs.
Trōv has already applied a pay-as-you go model for insurance to appliances, tech and household goods, but it could prove especially useful for cars. After all, two-thirds of people will be living in cities by 2050, and are growing number of people — especially Gen Yers — aren’t buying cars outright anymore. Digitally integrated models like Trōv and Cuvva’s are appealing because this cohort are used to managing their lives on their devices. By offering traditional coverage on a flexible basis, these services could prove vital to getting younger generations insured.
cuvva.com
Mica Anthony is Canvas8’s editorial assistant. She’s passionate about uncovering the newest electronic music producers, re-living ’90s fashion and championing the voices often left out of mainstream media.

Some Ideas For Reducing Uninsured Healthcare Costs & Health Insurance Premiums
Options I Would Explore If I Were Given The Chance To “Fix” Obamacare

Where Healthcare Stands Right Now
The Republicans have controlled Congress for more than six years. In all that time they failed to propose any legislation that would improve America’s healthcare system or fix any of their often-claimed defects in the Affordable Care Act.
Yesterday, without public debate or any outside input, the Republican leadership revealed a proposed healthcare law. Many details are missing. The costs and projected coverage are unknown. Still, they plan to ram their stealth plan through Congress in just a few weeks.
That seems reckless and irresponsible to me unless you understand that Republicans believe that everyone should be on their own and that people who can’t afford to pay for their own healthcare should do without.
For the details behind this statement see my article: The Conservatives’ Core Philosophy In 300 Words
Once you recognize that the Republicans don’t want any legislation that will create a public healthcare plan for all Americans, their failure to pass a comprehensive healthcare law in the last six years or to even propose any such plan beyond “Repeal the ACA” becomes understandable.
Given the fact that the Democrats have been legislatively unable to make any modifications to the ACA for the last six years and the Republican’s central goal is to avoid creating any publicly-funded medical insurance plan for all Americans I thought I may as well suggest a few things myself.
If I were the Speaker of the House and/or the Majority Leader of the Senate, here’s what I would want to discuss with knowledgeable healthcare industry professionals as possible new legislation.
Reduce Costs For Those Without Medical Insurance
A few years ago I had a one hour surgical procedure that required an operating room and a general anesthetic. I was home by lunch time. I received paperwork from the hospital that showed what they billed me and what my private insurer, Blue Cross, actually paid them.
The hospital bill was approximately $18,000. Blue Cross paid them around $1,900. Essentially, their normal, uninsured-patient charge for my procedure was almost ten times what they charged me as an insured person for the identical care.
Since hospitals seem to love having patients with major medical insurance I have to assume that they make a profit on providing medical care to people insured with traditional Blue Cross and similar major-medical plans.
So, if hospitals are making money when they provide services at the Blue Cross rates, how can they possibly justify charging people without insurance TEN TIMES what they charge Blue Cross insureds for the same services?
I guess because they can.
So, the first law I’d pass is one that would require every medical provider who charges for services not covered by medical insurance to include the following on their bill:
Their charge for the non-covered service
The smallest amount they would have accepted as full payment for that service from any of the major medical insurance providers with whom they have a contract. For simplicity I’ll call this the “Blue Cross Amount.”
A notice that they will accept 150% of the Blue Cross Amount as payment in full if it is paid to them within sixty days after the patient receives that bill.
A notice that they will accept 200% of the Blue Cross Amount as payment in full if it is delivered to them between sixty days and one-hundred-twenty days after the patient receives their bill, and
A statement that they will accept 300% of the Blue Cross Amount if paid between 120 days and twelve months after the patient receives their bill.
Obviously there would need to be rules that would calculate the charge if the patient paid half the bill within sixty days and half the remaining amount within the second sixty days and so forth.
Ban Extreme Markups
We’re all aware that hospitals often levy outrageous charges — $5 or a one-cent (or less) aspirin, and the like.
I would pass a second, separate law that barred providers from charging more than three times the amount Medicare would pay for any particular service, drug, appliance or procedure. If Medicare would pay $1 for a dose of Drug X then the hospital couldn’t bill more than $3 for a dose of Drug X.
To make up the shortfall and cover its administrative and overhead costs the hospital could have overhead charges in any amount it wanted, but that overhead charge would have to be prominently disclosed in advance.
For example, the hospital could charge $XXXX for a stay in the hospital between eight and twenty-four hours and $YYYY for a stay between four and eight hours, BUT these charges would have to be prominently displayed on the hospital’s website and they would have to be clearly described on a Notice And Consent form signed by the patient before the services were provided.
That way, patients could price-compare different hospitals and chose those with lower overhead fees.
The patient would, of course, also still be entitled to clear his/her bill by a payment of not more than 150% of the Blue Cross Amount paid within sixty days after receipt of the bill.
Reduce The Cost Of Basic Coverage
Caps On Coverage
I think it’s great that all kinds of coverage is available under the basic ACA policy, but I also think it’s great that my car has seat warmers, LED headlights, BOSE speakers, GPS, four-wheel steering and all kinds of other neat stuff.
The thing is, if you required every car to have all that stuff then cars would be far more expensive than they need to be.
If your goal were to subsidize transportation for poor people who need a car to get to work you’d be smart to make the BOSE speakers and the LED headlights optional extras.
I would say the same about subsidized medical insurance for poor people.
What are the kinds of things most people really need coverage for? Broken legs, kidney stones, food poisoning, heart attacks, skin cancer, hernia, concussion, etc.
Most people most of the time just need run-of-the-mill medical care. Most people most of the time don’t need a heart-transplant, but that’s the kind of expense that drives the cost of premiums through the roof.
You may have a thousand covered people and the medical care that’s provided to 999 of them in any twelve month period might cost the carrier perhaps a million dollars. Then the 1,000th person needs a liver transplant and that one patient’s bill is $2 million. That outlier is what the carrier has to plan for when it computes its premiums.
If you take away that small but very expensive risk and instead allow the carrier to quote a rate for a basic policy that is capped at $750,000 in payments over any twelve month period, I would think that you could drastically reduce the premium cost.
Essentially, 999 people will get the much more affordable coverage they need and one person won’t. The alternative is that the premiums for all 1,000 people will be so high that the government won’t subsidize the program at all.
If people want higher coverage limits they can pay extra and increase the cap to $1.5M or $5M or unlimited. Again, if the plan is to subsidize the purchase of a Honda Civic and if the participant wants an Accord with GPS and LED headlights, they should to pay extra for it.
Co-Pays
There’s always a tug-of-war between over-using medical care for every little runny nose on the one hand and co-pays that are so high that the insured can’t afford to obtain the treatment they need on the other.
I have no expertise in this area, but I would guess that something like 50% coverage for the first $500, 75% coverage for the next $500 ($675 insurance paid and $325 insured paid for the first $1,000 in a policy year), 85% coverage for next $1,000 and 100% coverage after the first $2,000 up to the cap amount in a policy year might be a more or less reasonable compromise.
Again, lower co-pays could be purchased by the insured for an additional premium.
Include Preventive Coverage
All the policies would be required to offer no co-pay, annual preventative screening for common ailments. It’s cheaper to treat skin cancer, high blood sugar, glaucoma and breast cancer if you detect them early, so it’s in both the patient’s and the insurance company’s best interest to discover those conditions as soon as possible.
These checkups and screening tests would be exempt from the co-pay provisions and would be fully covered by the insurance.
Everyone In One Group
The carriers would be required to offer the same premium to everyone regardless of age, gender or medical condition. In short, the carriers would have to determine a premium based on the group as a whole.
Adjust The Premium Based On The Actual Number Of Policies Sold
The larger the group, the lower the risk. Each carrier would have to post their base rate which would be the same for every insured without regard to age or medical condition, but each carrier could also post a rebate schedule based upon the number of policies they actually sell.
Blue Cross might have computed its base rate on the assumption that it would write 100,000 policies, but if it had known that it was going to sell 200,000 policies the base rate would have been less.
For example, Blue Cross might advertise a base rate for the basic policy at $200/month but agree that if the size of the group for the coverage year averages between XXXXX and YYYYY people then each person will get a $5/month rebate/credit at the end of the policy year, and if the average group membership for that year is between YYYYY and ZZZZZ then the policy-holders would get a $10/month rebate/credit.
This way Blue Cross could take some of the risk out of the equation by quoting the higher 100,000 policy rate but it could attract more business by advertising a rebate if sales exceeded minimum expectations.
Would Any Of This Do Any Good?
Hell, I don’t know. It would take experts at Healthnet or Blue Cross, Kaiser or Sutter Health to answer that question.
I’m just throwing out ideas here that seem logical to me. That doesn’t mean any of this would be a material improvement.
Is there anyone reading this who has the expertise to analyze these ideas and give us some practical feedback?
If so, I’d love to hear from you.
BTW, does anyone have any ideas on how to combat the huge prices being charged by some pharmaceutical companies? I have some ideas but I’d like to hear yours.
– David Grace (www.DavidGraceAuthor.com)
See a list of my other articles at: www.Medium.com/@DavidGraceAuth

Insurance 101 for start-ups

Any entrepreneur will tell you that starting a business is risky. Nothing will go quite as you expect, you’ll chuck your business plan out the window after the first week, and there’ll always be a surprise waiting around the corner. And that’s all part of the fun!
But, while many of the challenges and threats to your business are out of your control, there are some that you can do something about — by investing in the right insurance.
Insurers today offer protection against a whole host of business risks, from law suits to cyber-attacks, theft to social media mishaps. So if the worst does happen, you know there’ll be somebody to pick up the bill, and help you get back on your feet.
Not sure what cover your business might need? Here’s our insurance 101 for start-ups:
Employers liability
First and foremost, if you employ any staff, including contractors, casual, temporary or part-time employees, you are legally required to have Employers’ Liability cover. This will protect you if anybody suffers an illness or injury as a result of the work they’re doing for you, covering any subsequent legal expenses and compensation. And as it’s a legal requirement, you’ll also face hefty fines from the Health & Safety Executive if you don’t comply.

Public liability
We all have our moments of clumsiness, which is why public liability insurance was invented. PL will protect you if you or any of your employees cause harm to a member of the public — whether on your premises or elsewhere — covering any legal and compensation costs that you face as a result. It’s also worth bearing in mind that some of your clients, or even suppliers, might ask you to have PL, so make sure your minimum cover limit meets their requirements as well as your own.

Professional indemnity
Professional indemnity insurance (PI) is designed for those businesses that offer a professional service or advice, whether that’s a software developer, IT consultant, advertising agency or freelance designer. In these cases, PI will protect you if you make a mistake, or if a client suffers — or claims to suffer — a financial loss as a result of your work, covering legal expenses and compensation. You may also find that clients insist you have PI — so it could even help you win business (or not lose it!)

Cyber liability
A recent survey found that nearly half (43 per cent) of all cyber-attacks last year were on small businesses[1] — so it’s time to take the threat seriously. Cyber insurance is your final line of defence in the event of an attack, with good policies covering you for breach of data protection laws (where insurable by law), your liability for handling data, extortion, system rectification costs, plus PR expenses and financial loss due to system downtime. Bear in mind that policies can vary significantly, so be sure to seek specialist advice regarding the best option.

Media liability (sometimes errors and omissions or E&O)
These days, almost all digital businesses are producing and broadcasting or publishing media content. Just by using a blog, Twitter, Facebook or YouTube account, your business could face claims for slander, breach of copyright or making false or misleading statements. That’s where media liability insurance comes in, covering you for negligence in your own media content and advertising. So you can rest easy knowing if that post backfires, any legal fees and compensation costs will be covered.

Directors & Officers
D&O covers allegations that you, as a start-up director, have personally done something wrong, whether that’s making a decision without shareholder approval, or errors in financial reporting. Many start-up founders don’t realise that even as a director of a limited company, you can still personally face legal action, fines, or even prison sentences! So it’s worth covering your back. Investors will also often ask about D&O as part of their due diligence process, so having it shows you take your responsibilities seriously.

Contents and equipment
Whether you’re a freelancer working at home on a single laptop or a multinational corporation, the loss of your office essentials can cause significant disruption to your business. If that happens, contents insurance will cover everything in the office, including your fit-out, computers, office equipment, furniture and documents, while portable equipment insurance will cover everything you take out and about with you — that means laptops, mobiles, cameras and tablets. And if you’re in a co-working space, Digital Risks now has a policy for you too.
So there you go — your crash course on insurance for start-ups. We know it’s not as exciting as your day job, but it could save you a lot of money — and sleepless nights — further down the line! Want to find out more? Drop us an email, we’re always happy to help! hello@digitalrisks.co.uk

Can Fintech Insurance be disrupted? — Worry and Peace
Preface: We talk to James York, Founder of [Worry & Peace], a personal insurance store for travel, phone and cycle insurance. James talks to the Startup Magazine about the misconceptions, challenges and opportunities in the insurance industry.
Despite your background in insurance, it has taken you a a long time to be approved by the FCA. Do you think entrepreneurs from outside of the industry will even be able to enter the insurance space?
I wouldn’t say that you shouldn’t approach this industry if you are not from an insurance background. I would actually say that it will be great for outsiders to the industry to see that there are great minds here.
You will just need to get over the perception that insurance is a vertical that is unwilling to innovate, and can’t be made better in anyway.It’s an issue that has been created by the industry itself, and this is something I want to help us change. We (the insurance industry) need better self esteem. Insurance does a really bad job of showing it touches every point of the economy. ”
If you are coming to the industry from the outside, you will get an AR (appointed representative). The appointed representative can give you a ‘skinny’ authorisation. This is when someone in the industry extends their insurance certification around you and gives you 25% control over the whole insurance process.
You wouldn’t have any direct relationship with underwriters (those who determine the risk of the insurance), or complete control over the business. This is not ideal for someone who needs complete control, which more often than not, I believe a startup team does.
Getting direct authorisation from the FCA (Financial Conduct Authority) can take between three to to six months. Beyond that, there is no guarantee for a relationship with an underwriter. This is because business relationships in the insurance industry are based on trust, this is a problem for newcomers. To sell someone else’s insurance paper, you don’t give them consideration like you would in a wholesale environment (for example when selling chocolate bars or jeans), and then add a markup. Therefore the trust level is really critical, if you don’t have the reputation, or prerequisite skills, it will be very tough for you to get over the FCA regulations as well as making the right wholesale deals with insurers.
Where can innovation in the insurance industry?
I believe there are still ways industry newcomers can innovate. There are three ways I see this happening:
Point of choice
We, Worry and Peace, are innovating on the point of choice, helping you make a more informed decision on what insurance you would like to buy. We have created a price tariff which breaks down the structure of the pricing, to give transparency to our customers. Our fees are like shipping fees, it’s an important thing for consumers to understand that behind the retail process there is a supply chain, and they have a direct relationship both with the insurer and us.
Point of problem
Bought by Many are a company looking into the point of problem.. This involves creating specific insurance products for very specific problems, for example insurance for pugs or travel insurance for people with diabetes and clustering them with a good underwriter who can cover them in at a reasonable price.
Peer to Peer
Peer to peer, works to give consumers a new way to purchase insurance. This is what Guevara have done. Guevara works by having people take out insurance as a group, allowing them to keep the the money that they don’t claim.
What do you think is the biggest problem the insurance space is facing? How is Worry and Peace addressing it?
The biggest problem in the insurance industry is that consumers have been programmed to switch insurer every year which in the long run is bad for the consumers. This is because the value is trapped in the supply chain, due to the cost of acquisition of new users becoming so high. We want our users to understand the benefits of staying with the same insurer, and allow them the option to switch.
Insurance can’t change the fact that by buying insurance you are “betting” on bad luck happening, but the insurer is in that bet together with the consumer. If something bad happens to you, the insurer will have to payout. In fact you both benefit from good luck, because hopefully over time the insurer will build a relationship with you and reduce your price.
At Worry and Peace we are focusing on our own branding, we don’t use words such as compare, market or protect. This means we are not saying the same thing the insurance industry has said to consumers historically. We are working on creating lifestyle content on our website, that readers will find relatable.
We help them discover things to spend their time, money and brainpower on. That gives us an edge, because that makes consumers relate to us. We are able to then have better conversations with them, and offer them the right services. We operate this way because we believe that ultimately everyday life determines what you need to insure.
We are creating our own insurance products and differentiating over price,focussing on usability and clarity. There are two key ways we are doing this. Firstly, we are building tools that help users to manage their finances, including an organisation tool with reminders.The second part is through sharing the tools built buy other brands and startups. We would love to put their work in front of our community.
What is the future for Worry and Peace?
Our long term ambition is to help the industry change for the better,, for the good of the customer. Insurance can do amazing things, it has tons of capital, and great talent. Insurance touches every walk of life, there is no limit to the products we can create to benefit customers. In the future, I see Worry and Peace with a wider range of insurance products on offer, and a richer digital experience. We also aspire to continue to have more meaningful conversations with shoppers, and to help insurers achieve that too.
Originally published at thestartupmag.com on August 21, 2015.

I paid too, but more as insurance. I wouldn’t want the Tech Gods to erase my work, and nobody knows how this will work or what it will mean.

Disruption Watch: Gasoline, Insurance, and Rental Cars

Gasoline: This article teases the headline of a gasoline-less future, but the article doesn’t really deliver on the headline.
I got to thinking, though — in a self-driving world, maybe gasoline doesn’t go away, but gas stations change a lot.
Modern gas station infrastructure is predicated on people stopping at stations that are convenient relative to their pre-existing routes. But if the car can drive itself to the station and fill up (or a station attendant fills it), then the stations no longer need such prime real estate.
It might also make sense to consolidate gas stations, much the way landfills are consolidated.
And that’s to say nothing of the convenience stores at the station, which presumably the self-driving car won’t need.
Could it be the end of iconic gas station price signs?
Insurance: A Cal Poly professor offers a contrarian take on insurance in the age of self-driving cars. Patrick Lin argues that a combination of corporate risk-aversion, personal privacy, and software bugs will necessitate the continued existence of auto insurance.
I think maybe so, but the industry might also be so different as to be almost unrecognizable. At some point that must count as the end of the auto insurance industry and the beginning of the self-driving car insurance industry.
Also, reinsurers may prove more adept at servicing this market than existing auto insurers.
Car Rental: A press release highlights a panel discussion about how self-driving cars will affect the rental car industry.
It sounds like early days for them, but it’s definitely on the radar.

Forgot to mention keeping adult children on their parents’ insurance plan until they are TWENTY-SEVEN GODDAM YEARS OLD under the ACA. #adulting as The Democrats see it. They crow about it as a success. Not blameless.
But I get it. By the time I was 25, I had bought two houses and was a VP with some big F500 corp that has now slid into insolvency a while back. I clawed my way out of poverty, lying and cheating as many systems as I could to escape that hell.
Mid 50s and I’m pretty much now unwanted biowaste most of corporate and political America wishes would hurry up and die already. I’m clogging up the economic tubes with my impending grabby hands on those entitlements I think I’m owed.
American Patriot
I forgot to write my Fourth of July excrement to the interwebs yesterday. Here it is, a day late and a dollar short.medium.com


The Three Pillars of Connected Insurance in Italy
Read the full story here.
High connectivity is one of the hallmarks of the modern society. At any moment in time, individuals are plugged into society through the range of devices, which as well are constituting a complex ecosystem of smart connected things.
As fairly stated in Harvard Economics Review, “Consumers are becoming more and more connected whether it is at home, at work, behind the wheel, when they engage in sports and leisure activities, and so on. This is happening quite fast, due to the adoption of smart devices, and companies have to be able to react accordingly in order to maximize value both for their clients and for themselves.”
Connected insurance came into play as an industry that can fully leverage the level and importance of modern connectivity. Matteo Carbone of the Connected Insurance Observatory (the innovative think tank created in Italy by the consultancy firm Bain & Company with the Italian National Association of Insurance Companiesand 30+ international Insurers) defines the term connected insurance is an “insurance solution based on sensors for collecting data on the state of an insured risk & telematics for remote transmission and management of the data collected.”

Carbone defines telematics as an “integrated use of informatics and telecommunication, it is about capturing, storing and analyzing data via telecommunication devices. <…> Telematics could be one of the most relevant digital innovation in the insurance industry directly impacting the technical results. Due to the pervasive diffusion of the Internet of Everything this approach could be extended from motor insurance to other insurance businesses.”
Three components of a puzzle create the concept of connected insurance — Health, Motor and Home.
A particular country is believed to be at the forefront of innovation with connected insurance solutions. As Carbone shared, connected insurance concept has been concretely used in Italy along with other markets in motor insurance business.
Find out more here.
Italy, being the pioneer in motor business, has a relevant experience either in terms of penetration (~15% penetration), or in defining approach to the market. Moreover, Italy is going into the next innovation wave with home and health telematics offering definition.
Andrea Silvello, Founder & Partner at DigitalTech International, commented on the Italian motor telematics, saying that Italy’s strong automotive industry and the fact the country is a pioneer in working with telematics starting way back in 2002, are the circumstances making Italy the leading market in connected insurance over US, UK and South Africa.
As for the health and home insurance pieces of the puzzle, Silvello adds that, “The future of connected healthcare will also be influenced by new emerging models like seamless care, shared care, collaborative care and home hospitals, even if it may take some time. The attribute all these models have in common is their “customer-centric” trait which will probably become a driver for change, precisely because the current health systems seem to be having difficulties in coping with the current needs of the overall population, especially in overpopulated countries.”
“The third piece of the connected insurance puzzle is the “home insurance” market which is expected to reach $235 billion in 2016. Data shows that last year two-in-five insurance firms invested in some kind of project based on connected devices and 45% of insurers believe that connected devices will help drive growth in the next three years.”
Italy has quite a developed ecosystem of innovators defining the connected insurance industry. Let’s look at ten of the most interesting players in the market.
The Generali Group
The Generali Group (known in Italy as Assicurazioni Generali) is one of the most significant players in the global insurance and financial products market. It was founded in 1831 in Trieste, Italy. In the non-life segment, its portfolio ranges from mass-market coverage such as car, home, accident & health, to sophisticated commercial and industrial risk coverage. The group is actively investing on connected insurance, has a strategic partnership with Vitality and acquired the telematics startup Mydrive last year.
PosteVita
PosteVita is part of the Italian Poste Group and it is a successful bancassurance case history. In the last 10 years, the company was able to become the Italian leader on life and pension business and recently introduced a connected home insurance solution for the P&C business.
OctoTelematics
OctoTelematics is a telematics service provider, offering an integrated portfolio of telematics solution. The company was acquired by Renova Group in February 2014. The company’s technology captures and analyzes behavioral, contextual and driving data to provide innovative solutions for partners, and is powered by the largest telematics database in the world.
Consiglio dal Medico
Consiglio dal Medico is an app that allows to receive medical advice from a network of qualified specialists and pay for the consultation by simply touching the screen wherever and whenever desired. Users can reserve a private chat with the doctor, who they can choose from range of profiles of the experts. This startup delivered more than 30,000 medical answers in two years.
UniplSai
UniplSai is the P&C Insurance leader on the Italian market. It was a pioneer on auto telematics since 2003 and currently, its portfolio of more than 2 million of boxes live represent the largest insurance telematics portfolio worldwide.
Continue reading here.


The Sources of Innovation in the Insurance Industry
Read the full story here.
The insurance industry is one of the most exciting areas of innovation with the highest disruption potential for tech-powered startups. In 2015, more than $1.2 billion was invested in InsurTech startups — 6 times the amount invested in 2010. According to a 2015 report from WEF, “The most imminent effects of disruption will be felt in the banking sector; however, the greatest impact of disruption is likely to be felt in the insurance sector.”
Application of the latest technological advancements across industries is known to bring positive implications both for businesses and for consumers. AI, big data, IoT, blockchain technology and new business models applied in the insurance industry in recent years have proven the importance of tech-led transformation in traditional spheres.
Blockchain technology
Blockchain technology hasn’t found application boundaries yet and the insurance industry could certainly benefit from the application of technology of the future. One of the applications of blockchain-enabled smart contracts — as seen by professionals — is in building a P2P or crowdfunded insurance model.
In addition, as Scott Gottlieb, resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute (AEI), shared, blockchain technology could be used to design more intuitive insurance risk pools. As Mr. Gottlieb suggested, blockchain-powered risk pools would enable real-time auto-regulation of insurance subsidies. Real-time access to the most relevant and accurate data will boost the freedom of insurers to offer a customized solution without missing out on premiums. Blockchain technology can also be applied to increase transparency of the products insured. At the end, blockchain-powered smart contracts combined with real-time recording can be applied to automate the claims settlement.
Artificial intelligence (AI)
Artificial intelligence is one of the most fascinating achievements of this century and is believed to stir waters across industries. Some of the ways in which AI could foster the development of InsurTech is data capture and storage, data analysis and policy tailoring with personalized bundling. Given the strict regulatory environment in the insurance industry, AI can keep companies up to date on the latest regulatory implementations and “advise” insurance companies on policy development and pricing models. AI also has a potential to prevent expenses on claims over staged accidents based on historical data.
Big ‘Smart’ Data
Big ‘smart’ data is as important in the insurance industry as in any other. Just like with financial services companies turning to smart data rather than financial data, the insurance industry will have to find a new approach in risk assessment for more accurate policy tailoring.
Find out more here.
Alternative data is believed to contain valuable information hidden from the official records. Social media networks, GPS locations and other alternative data can feed an intelligent underwriting algorithm with habitual portrait and make risk assessment and predictive analytics of possible risks regarding a particular person based on real, dynamic lifestyle rather than static records.
Development of new forms of insurance
Common risks faced by everyone in a nation are now well-known and have formed quite a standard set of insurance policies against them. However, the environment we live in is ever-changing and new risks emerge over time requiring new forms of insurance. Data breach insurance for business owners, for example, or insurance against other types of cybercrime, which has grown rapidly in recent years.
Microinsurance is another interesting form of insurance addressing the needs of low-income or disadvantaged groups of population. It is a particularly relevant form of insurance for regions with a large number of population living in poverty and otherwise excluded from the financial and insurance industries.
Antonis Malagardis from the German aid agency Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit, outlined the exceptional importance of microinsurance, saying, “The point here is that people create a type of self-awareness that they are conscious that risk can happen any time… And they are the ones to contribute and be responsible in addressing this. They don’t necessarily rely on dole-outs, which is exactly the point of creating self-respect.”
Internet of Things (IoT) and advanced sensory technology
Given that out of 28 billion connected devices forecasted by 2021, 16 billion will be related to IoT, the importance of leveraging the connectivity is hard to overestimate. Moreover, out of the total number of IoT devices, 1.5 billion will have a cellular subscription by 2021. For comparison, at the end of 2015, there were ‘only’ ~400 million IoT devices with cellular subscriptions.
With the explosive growth rate of IoT devices enabled with advanced sensory technology, the network of connected devices will be able to accumulate a tremendous amount of meaningful data about one’s activities and the environment. Over time, sensory technology will gain even greater importance as it will accumulate a significant amount of data. Underwriting will get to another level with the opportunity to put together historical data and detailed streams of current data from a variety of connected devices. It will allow the viewing of more accurate patterns and make accurate forecasts.
Powered by accurate and detailed data streams coming from sensory technology, underwriters will be able to play a significant role in developing new products, shaping tailored packages for different markets and define the pricing policy.
Continue reading here.

The Tragicomedy of Modern Health Insurance
A play in three acts
Act I
Hospital: You own $6800 for services performed more than a year ago.
Me: What the?
Hospital: It looks like Insurance clawed back benefits.
Me: Hey Insurance, what’s the deal?!?
Insurance: You have other insurance.
Me: I don’t have other insurance. [Supplies written proof.]
Insurance. You totally have other insurance, and they need to pay your benefits.
Me: I don’t have other insurance.
Insurance: You still have other insurance.
Me: I DON’T HAVE OTHER INSURANCE.
Insurance: We spoke to that other insurance company and it turns out you don’t have other insurance.
Me: …
Insurance: We’ll re-process the claims.
Act II
Hospital: You still owe us $6800.
Me: Insurance didn’t re-process the claims?
Hospital: Nope.
Me: Can’t you resubmit the claims?
Hospital: Hm. No. Have your insurance call us.
Me: Hahahaha. Two giant corporations need me to tell them to talk to each other. That’s funny.
Hospital: …
Me: Oh.
Act III
Me: Hi Insurance, can you re-process these claims?
Insurance: Those claims are more than a year old.
Me: OK…
Insurance: So you need to send a note to our appeals department.
Me: Appealing what?
Insurance: Appealing the rejected claims.
Me: To be clear, those claims shouldn’t have been rejected in the first place.
Insurance: Which is why you need to appeal them.
Me: But this was YOUR error.
Insurance: And this is the process to fix the error.
Me: But I didn’t make the error.
Insurance: I’ll give you that address. Do you have a pen?
Me: [Bad words]
Insurance: Please hold.
Miraculously, they’ve offered to resubmit the claims without my appealing. Stay tuned…

Three Ideas: Automatic Thoughts, Cybersecurity Insurance, and Books
Here are three ideas I’ve been thinking a lot about in the recent months. I started putting this list into writing while responding to a friend’s email, and ended up spending so much time on it that I decided to post it here as well. These three ideas don’t interrelate very much, but each one is something that I’d personally find very valuable in my life / business. So without further ado, here they are:
1. Something to Help Understand & Improve Your Automatic Thoughts
Automatic thoughts are the building blocks of our personality. They’re the thoughts we have over and over about ourselves and these repetitive thoughts are a lot of the basis of who we are and the kind of person we grow into. They’re the lenses we use to understand ourselves, others, and the world we live in.
Just like learning a language, it’s easy to cultivate and change automatic thoughts when you’re younger, but as we grow, our automatic thoughts cement themselves and become our reality. I’m curious about how malleable they are, and if it’s possible to make something that lets you, within reason, make small changes to your automatic thoughts.
Something that could impact a person’s automatic thoughts over a sustained period of time, even in the slightest, would be incredibly powerful. Imagine spending an afternoon taking an inventory of these thoughts, and then deciding what you would like your automatic thoughts to be. Research has shown that the most effective way to get someone to quit smoking, for example, is to constantly remind them that they are not meant to be a smoker, and that their true essence / personality is of someone who is fit and lives a healthy lifestyle.
This idea means a lot to me and is something I’ve been thinking about for a while. I attempted it once in 2010 and keep coming back to the idea. There is certainly a latent need: Americans spend huge amounts of money on talk therapy every year. People obviously want help thinking about and working on their identities, so what if there was software that could help supplement this?
2. Cybersecurity Insurance Policies Aimed at Small-to-Medium Businesses
I believe that cyberwarfare is going to be a bigger risk than most people think / are budgeting for, and that businesses are going to need protection from this type of risk. As our information economy grows, the cost of getting hacked and the downtime and loss-of-trust that ensures will only increase and become an enormous liability for any company to stomach. Large companies have a hard enough time dealing with this; imagine starting a startup and having to think about this?
SOX compliance costs, ISO certification, and NIST guidance is simply too much for any small-to-medium company to stomach. Even with those in place, there should be something simple that a company can do to make protect themselves against these types of risks.
I’m curious if there is an opportunity for a property & casualty insurance company that really understands cybersecurity risks. It’d have to have the underwriting acumen of GEICO along with the domain expertise of FireEye or Kaspersky. Tactically, I think that this company would be an insurance company that does routine security assessments to ensure that its clients are up-to-date and have the right protocols/procedures in place. Insured companies would pay premiums to the insurance company for both (1) a standard insurance contract covering a certain set of attack surfaces and (2) routine monitoring to ensure that systems are protected and organizational protocols are in place.
I can picture this company at a terminal state where it would sell huge contracts to Fortune 500 companies, but I think a more interesting question would be how one could protect smaller companies that have sensitive information and digital assets that need to be protected?
3. Buzzfeed is to Newspapers as X is to Books
What is the purpose of a book? There are at least two possible answers:
If a book is a way for an author to share prose with readers over time, then books are in a terminal state and there isn’t much innovation left. We started with Gutenberg’s press, then mass paperback production, then eBooks; perhaps the next iteration of books will be reading by virtual reality or whatever platform we come up with next.
For some books, though, I believe that authors have an agenda they want to impart on their readers. If you think of books this way, then there might be room for something that fulfills the use case but might not look like a book / eBook at all. eBooks are great, but I feel like eventually someone will invent something that really fulfills the same use case, but in a more effective way.
Some evidence why I think this is true:
Most books do not need to be as long as they are — in fact many books could be distilled into 20–30% their original length and still get the same message across.
To really take advantage of a book, you generally have to take notes, annotate it, copy phrases that you find meaningful, and generally do a lot of work that might render the book less valuable to someone else.
I’m not sure if other people have this problem, but every time I read How to Win Friends and Influence People, I’ll follow through with the principles outlined for a short time, but will forget almost everything within a week or so. What if there was some way where the book could remind you things you needed to learn after you read/experienced the book? Maybe this could have something to do with Spaced Repetition.
Again, this idea might not lead anywhere since it’s reasoning purely through metaphor. But suspending disbelief for a second: just like how newspapers have been forced to evolve, a similar shift might happen in the publishing industry, except it hasn’t happened yet because people can still get value from books (whereas they do not get as much from physical newspapers).
This article was originally posted on my own site.

Dave Grigger, Regrettably, I do not carry malpractice insurance at this time. Therefore, no “legal opinions” will be forthcoming.

We don’t. We let them go and set up a large fund called the United States of America Insurance and we invite them to compete with a group that covers 320 million people.
Health insurance CEOs are inept: HRC 21/100
18 August, 2016 | Indexmedium.com
Good luck. #MedicareForAll

I have several theories on how health insurance companies continue to make outrageous profits.
Most insurers deny a certain number of claims out right for no particular reason. Sure there’s a coded explanation like “Not medically necessary,” or “voluntary procedure.” Often times people have already had the procedure that has been denied. If they aren’t up for fighting, they just pay.
I’ve heard that 66% or all claims are processed incorrectly. This is the fault of both insurers and providers. I know from an audit I had done on my claims that 94 out of 156 claims were filed wrong. That’s almost exactly 66%. Most people don’t know that their claims are being filed incorrectly so they pay $30 instead of $20 to see a specialist or some similar situation. That’s all profit for insurers.
The systems the insurers use are purposefully confusing and convoluted. Example: I received a note from my doctor that I wanted to include in my claim. It came as a digital file. I had to print it out and fax it to the insurance company. While on the phone with my representative, she had to print out the fax (which had been digitized again), walk it over to another system and scan it in. This process took a long time and three phone calls. If I weren’t committed, I would have quit and just paid the money. Or I would have given up and let the bill collectors come after me.

I’m still trying to get to the bottom of the real problems in the health insurance system. But I’m having people report their health insurance nightmares to me. Please share your stories or, if you don’t have a story, share this with someone who does. www.thedigitalchampion.com

Susan Christiana I can’t advise you on your insurance because you are the best judge of your tolerance for risk. I can say for myself, I have made peace with my mortality, I have a DNR (in Ohio, need 2 doctors to sign off saying I’m sane, blah blah) a Living Will, a Will, trusts for my kids, protected assets (I as a person own practically nothing) and everything in order. My “plan” has been crafted carefully over a period of twenty or so years so I would be a bad source for immediate advice anyway.
The IRS will fine you under the ACA for not carrying insurance. I’m not sure how much, 3% of your income? Not sure what your years to Medicare are but if they are anything like mine, I am surprised at the acceleration of decline I experience in as little as a year. Things that used to creep up over time, like vision, that pain in your back, etc seem to be more acute and forever chronic now. That is the part that kinda scares me and I’m sure why Anthem BC/BS of Ohio wants to get rid of me and the last 10 yards of me trying to get into the Medicare end zone. They can only legally increase my premiums by 29% and they feel that isn’t nearly enough. But they also know if they try charging the Millennials more, that buyer end will revolt. They figure must of us are homeowners and have some assets/wealth and we’re not going anywhere. We’re just an easy target.
Back to your concern. I know some people our age who are doing exactly what you’re doing. They figure they will sign up for a marketplace plan when they need it and just pay the IRS fine when they don’t. I’m not entirely sure that is a good idea, but it is what they do to sleep nights.
Hospitals want to get paid. When older people use their money to file for bankruptcy right away on medical debt instead of trying to pay a medical debt, they know they are not getting any of their money. When you’re 55+ and living in a home a corporation owns and have no assets except for one car (which isn’t really an “asset”) and a retirement fund, you file bankruptcy, what’s the loss? A FICO Score? Dignity? Who cares? Dignity used to be being debt free, not filing bankruptcy, paying your bills on time, etc, etc. The new dignity is fighting the system and winning, living to breathe another day.
F*ck em. Do what you have to do to survive and live, even if that means lying, cheating and stealing. People value character in other people but corporations are owed none of that!
Only my opinion. I hope this helps give you peace.
Ezra Klein < — tagging you re: Sarah Kliff

And the health insurance industry is scooping up the spirits and earning potential of the 50–64 demo. Together, they are squeezing every last penny out of the American economy.
Distract the Millenials by focusing on the crushing cost of education and the lack of jobs; turn them against the older, wealth-sucking Boomers.
Distract the Boomers by focusing on the crushing cost of health care and the lack of jobs; turn them against the lazy, entitled Millenials.
The plan is working beautifully.

I’ve had the most success with reputable eating disorder clinics that are accepted by insurance. They must meet the up-to-date protocol for EDs. Many therapists think they know how to treat EDs, when they are completely ignorant of the standard protocol that works best and is what is covered by insurance.
I’m interested in how the DBT is working for you. I’ve not had good results with it, with just a few exceptions. Between my ADD and extreme difficulty with focus, it’s been a difficult tool for me that I haven’t taken advantage of with a couple simple exceptions that are helpful. Again, thanks for your courage, Deborah. You are a brave and strong woman ❤

Are you equating the “fight climate change agenda” with insurance?
I’m sure you do not pay half your income for insurance against getting hit by a bus. That is what the Global Warming people are asking for. The world is already pouring $300 billion into fighting climate change, and they want to ramp that up to trillions per year. Obama is closing down conventional plants while extremists are blocking wind farms, solar farms and hydro dams because they aren’t good for wildlife.
The economies of all industrial nations requires cheap, abundant and reliable energy to run on. All our food supply and manufactured goods, all our transportation and electricity, require cheap, abundant and reliable energy. If Progressives and Extremists had their way, America would have none of that.
So do you want to pay half your income for energy and half of what’s left for food? Because that is the price of trying to insure your grandchildren against having a two degree warmer winter. And it’s all money wasted, because the climate will change anyway.

hooray! also dental insurance is so often not that worthwhile. it’s usually $40/month and most annual (okay or biannual if you’re a girl scout) appointments are $200. Then when you get a cavity or need some more complicated work, dental insurance often only covers like 20%. At this the kind I’ve seen. The self-pay discount is often about the same as what you end up paying when insured. IT’S A SCAM, I SAY.
Or, it’s just different than regular old health insurance. Great to have but if you’re paying the premiums out-of-pocket, I don’t know. I’ve always been like, “Wow! Only $40 a month! Wait.”

That’s a lovely summary of practical ways to apply mindfulness (and the “insurance policy” metaphor is superb). Since you asked for resources, a few days ago I posted a two-part reading list you (and your readers) might find helpful:
Ten Great Books for Working More Mindfully (Part 1 of 2) - Andrew Savikas | Personal Blog
"Wisdom is acquired by meditation"- Publilius Syrus This is the first half of a list of 10 books I've found especially…savik.as
Ten Great Books for Working More Mindfully (Part 2 of 2) - Andrew Savikas | Personal Blog
We do not receive wisdom, we must discover it for ourselves, after a journey through the wilderness, which no one else…savik.as

Interesting position from one of the comments “ You don’t have insurance to pay for gas. You have insurance for when you get in a wreck.” The reality is that even more than Umair has identified, health coverage is as much about funding preventative care and habits than it is about fixing a person when they are sick. Society will be much happier and more productive if its people felt confident in their future. Effective national healthcare supports regular doctor visits and preventative care to ensure issues are caught early and therefore far less costly to”fix” and less devastating to the people when issues arise.
The comment compared Healthcare coverage to Automotive insurance. Well, to some degree that is a great analogy. When preventative habits are leveraged (don’t speed, run red lights, talk or text on phones etc), premiums stay low………. Why? Because the risk of catastrophic loss and overall impact is reduced. Even under Obamacare, the cost of healthcare per capita is one of the highest in the world but when compared to other countries with more comprehensive healthcare, its effectiveness for the population as a whole is one of the lowest.

The Complete Guide to Inbound Marketing for Insurance Agencies

Inbound marketing is set to completely change the lead generation process for insurance agencies in 2016.
If you’re not familiar with the term or the concept, here’s a brief description, according to marketing automation giant HubSpot:
The Inbound Methodology covers each and every step taken, tool used, and lifecycle stage traveled through on the road from stranger to customer.
It empowers marketers to attract visitors, convert leads, close customers, and delight promoters.
You do it using tools and applications that help you create and deliver content that will appeal to precisely the right people (your buyer personas) in the right places (channels) at just the right times (lifecycle stages).
In even simpler terms, inbound has flipped the script on traditional sales & marketing in that instead of going to them, your target audience comes to you.
The primary weapons are social media, great websites, and great content in the form of a company or personal blog.
Inbound Marketing for Insurance Agencies
Insurance is an incredibly rewarding profession and can be highly lucrative.
It’s also an industry that is heavily entrenched in the old way of doing things.
This presents an incredible opportunity for those who are willing to change and adapt to new technologies and mediums of exchange. Agents and brokers who embrace and invest in inbound will reap the benefits of being first movers.
Those who refuse should begin planning for retirement.
What makes inbound marketing so effective for insurance agents?
First, some facts about the effect inbound has had on the industry:
Insurance agencies that use blogging as a part of their marketing strategy have acquired at least 30% of their new clients from those efforts.
The same Hubspot study disclosed that 61% of insurance agencies have acquired new clients from Linkedin.
40% of agencies have gained new clients by using Twitter.
These numbers show that inbound marketing for insurance is not just an advertising fad or a trick. With the right approach, it is a flat-out game-changer.
The Process
To achieve success with this kind of stragegy, first accept that it isn’t a cheap trick that you can expect to work overnight. The process of finding the right approach is time-intensive and riddled with complexities.
I tell my clients all the time, “Do things you can sustain.” By this, I mean that to see results, you’ll have to commit to a strategy and faithfully execute, week-in and week-out.
Lots of agents get really excited, only to lose steam as soon as things get busy. This simply won’t get the job done.
Commit to the long game.

Need more insurance leads?
Watch the video below to learn out how you can automate your digital marketing and generate leads in your sleep.
Click to Get 15% off LifeDrip and Start Getting New Leads Today.
Originally published at www.linkedin.com.

Great. Now write a full explainer on portable health insurance. The stuff that covers you around the world, or even in the next state over, is incredibly expensive. Also the older you get, the premiums go up EXPONENTIALLY. In my casual market research, Millennials get somewhat upset when asked if more than $200/month for health insurance is “expensive.” (Try min $1,000 at 50+) The cheaper Marketplace plans only cover you within a particular state. It’s as if someone knew we wanted to become more mobile and decided they ain’t having workers move around. Mobile people are harder to control.
I also assume you are talking about healthy folks who don’t need a regular doctor or say, an oncologist. I get where you are going with this piece, but the subtext is ableism.
I don’t want to appear negative, just practical. I assumed you would cover this as you started off with some very good advice on taxes, something many people don’t even think about until they are knee-deep in back-taxes and penalties. One accident, one illness can wipe out a lifetime of profit in the portable business.
PS I have such a business. It took me 30 years to get to a highly mobile place, but it’s mobile. Even my health insurance, which is a very expensive PPO.

Why you might need to review your public liability insurance

If you’ve recently started your own business, then chances are your ‘to do’ list is looking pretty scary right now. And however much you might want to avoid them, there are inevitably some administrative hurdles you need to overcome in the early stages. One of these is sorting out your public liability insurance.
In 2013/2014, the UK government’s Compensation Recovery Unit recorded over 103,000 public liability claims, up from 94,000 in 2010/2011. Meanwhile, last year liability insurers paid out around £6m every day to protect businesses from these types of claims.
Public liability insurance will cover your business if a client or member of the public suffers a loss or injury as a result of your actions, paying any legal and compensation costs so you don’t have to. Even if you don’t host clients or members of the public in your office, you could still be at risk when you or your employees visit clients’ offices or attending industry events.
You should keep an eye on your PL cover over time, as the level you need is likely to change as your business grows and evolves. This means reviewing your needs on at least an annual basis, or you could be in for a nasty shock if anything does go wrong.
Here are a few reasons why you might need to review your public liability insurance:
Your team grows
As you take on more employees, including temporary workers, contractors and volunteers, the risk of public liability claims becomes greater.

Your business travels with you
Attending exhibitions and conferences is a great way of getting your name out there, making contacts and growing your customer base. But attending these events also means there’s a greater chance you could be held liable if you cause an accident or injury to another member of the public. If this results in a claim, public liability insurance will make sure you don’t foot the bill.

You work with bigger clients
Winning bigger clients is a sign that your business is going places. But bear in mind, that in general, the bigger your clients, the bigger the potential liability. So if you’re winning big, take a moment to review your level of your cover, making sure it’s sufficient for your needs.

It’s becoming increasingly common for organisations to stipulate that their suppliers have public liability insurance as a condition of working with them. In this situation, it’s a no brainer and could be the difference between gaining that dream client, or watching them go to a competitor.

You are moving office
Whether you’re a start-up upgrading from the kitchen table, or a more established business looking for a step up, if anyone should injure themselves in your new home, you could be held liable.
Not sure how much cover is enough for your business? Then pick up the phone or drop us a line to have a chat and find the best policies to suit your individual circumstances.
Call us today on 0333 772 0759 or send us an email.

Big Insurance Companies Are Warning The U.S. To Prepare For Climate Change
In this Oct. 30, 2012 file photo, a parking lot full of yellow cabs in Hoboken, N.J. is flooded as a result of Superstorm Sandy. CREDIT: AP PHOTO/CHARLES SYKES
A coalition of big insurance companies, consumer groups, and environmental advocates are urging the United States to overhaul its disaster policies in the face of increasingly extreme weather due to human-caused climate change.
According to a report released Tuesday by the SmarterSafer coalition, the U.S. needs to increase how much it spends on pre-disaster mitigation efforts and infrastructure protection. That way, it asserts, the U.S. can stop wasting so much money on cleaning up after a disaster happens.
“Our current natural disaster policy framework focuses heavily on responding to disasters, rather than putting protective measures in place to reduce our vulnerability and limit a disaster’s impact,” the report reads. “This needlessly exposes Americans to greater risks to life and property and results in much higher costs to the federal government.”
The SmarterSafer coalition is made up of more than 30 different groups, including some of the biggest insurance companies in the world: Allianz, Liberty Mutual, SwissRe, and USAA, to name a few. Adequately dealing with the risks of climate change is inherently important to the insurance industry, as failure to prepare can lead to increased costs for insurance companies when storms wipe out basements and take out walls.
Making sure the government is prepared is important for private insurers too. Because if governments don’t fortify their infrastructure, the damage can fall onto the companies. A good example is Farmers Insurance Co., which sued local governments in the Chicago area last year for failing to prepare for climate change (the lawsuits have since been dropped). That lack of preparedness, the lawsuits said, caused sewers to burst into people’s homes and property values to decline — damage that Farmers had to pay for.

Disaster costs have been increasing as the economy has grown and infrastructure has become more expensive.
CREDIT: smartersafer.org
According to SmarterSafer’s report, states that are hit by disasters like extreme floods and fires rely too easily on monetary assistance from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) after said disaster occurs. Under FEMA’s Stafford Act, states can easily apply for disaster assistance. When that assistance is granted, the federal government is accountable for at least 75 percent of the costs.
Because states know federal relief is available and easy to get, the report argues, states are unmotivated to significantly prepare for extreme weather events.
“With the federal government taking on such an enormous share of the financial burden and nearly all recovery responsibility, there is little incentive for disaster-prone states to take action to reduce risk,” the report says. “For example, disaster-prone states like Texas and Louisiana are among those spending the least of their state budget on emergency response and mitigation programs that can reduce disaster costs.”
The report suggested changing FEMA’s payment system so that states that have taken the most mitigation and preparation efforts are rewarded with more federal aid when disasters strike. “[R]ather than simply writing a blank check after every disaster,” it says, “disaster assistance must be provided on a sliding scale so that communities can get a full share of funding only if they have taken significant steps to protect its residents from harm.”
There’s little question that disaster costs have increased in the last several decades. Since the Stafford Act was passed in 1988, the report notes that disaster declaration have steadily escalated — from 16 declarations in 1988 to 242 declarations in 2011.

Since 1980, the U.S. has increased its yearly spending on disaster relief.
CREDIT: smartersafer.org
The reasons for those increased disaster costs are two-fold, the report says. For one, the economy has grown since 1980, and there’s been more development — meaning there are bigger and more expensive structures to be damaged when extreme events hit. The other reason, it asserts, is climate change, which is increasing the risks that bad storms will occur across the country.
One of the biggest climate risks is sea level rise, which has increased both the frequency and length of minor coastal flooding — also called “nuisance flooding.” Whereas nuisance flooding along the Atlantic, Gulf, and West Coasts only occurred less than once per year at any given location in the 1950s, it now occurs on average about once every three months, the report says.
In addition, periods of very heavy precipitation have increased in every region of the country except Hawaii since 1958, according to the National Climate Assessment. That’s been particularly bad in the Northeast and Midwest, which have seen 71 percent and 37 percent increases in very heavy precipitation, respectively.
While those projections may not be alarming to some, they are certainly red flags for the insurance industry — a business which is based almost solely on credible estimation of risk. And the risks are growing, the report notes — if global action on climate change is not taken, sea level rise is projected to increase anywhere from 8.4 inches to 6.6 feet above 1992 levels, according to the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration. Risks of heavy precipitation, wildfires, and heat waves are also projected to increase.
“In short, we face a costlier and more unpredictable future,” the report says. “With the risks so apparent, action must be taken now to curb the harshest effects.”


Getting Insurance for Your Drone Operations
An aviation insurance expert explains why you need insurance & shares tips for getting competitive rates
By Anya Lamb, Marketing Manager @DroneDeploy
Part 107, the new FAA regulation that took effect earlier this week, makes it dramatically easier for businesses in the United States to operate drones legally. A pilot’s license and section 333 exemption are no longer required for most commercial drone operations. Instead, commercial operators must simply pass a written test to obtain a remote pilot’s certificate. That said, if you are planning to start a drone business or launch drone operations in your company, you will likely need to go beyond the minimum requirements of Part 107 to set up safe, reliable and effective drone operations.
One of the things you’ll need to think about is insurance. And not just as a potential client segment or use case for drones — even though drones are being used by insurance companies to investigate claims — but as an important step in starting your operations that will help protect you and your business from liability in the face of an accident.
To learn more about how drone insurance works, why you need it, and tips for getting a good policy, we heard from Bryant Dunn, Assistant Vice President and General Aviation Underwriter at Global Aerospace, a worldwide provider of aerospace and aviation insurance.
Bryant Dunn, Assistant Vice President, Underwriting General Aviation at Global Aerospace
Global Aerospace focuses exclusively on aviation insurance and insures many major aerospace manufacturers around the world. Global underwrites everything from drone operators, to drone manufacturers, training organizations, and much more. Global developed the first UAS-specific policy form in the marketplace, and for the past five years, has been a market-leader in this new segment, authoring white papers that focus on risk management and forming key relationships with safety experts in training arena.
“Part 107 reduces the barriers to entry for a drone operation to be legally compliant. That being the case, we anticipate that many more operators will be flying and exploring insurance options,” said Bryant.
Why You Need Insurance
There are two primary reasons that your drone operations need to be insured. The first reason is fairly obvious — to protect you and your company from legal liability. If an operator experiences an uninsured accident, they could be held personally liable and face significant financial consequences.
The second reason is that many of your potential clients or partners may require you to have insurance. This is particularly true of large companies.
“Most large companies will not hire a drone operator that is uninsured,” said Bryant.
There are several types of insurance policies relevant for drone operations. Bryant recommends that drone operators should — at a minimum — have a Hull & Liability policy. Hull insurance covers damage to the drone itself, whereas general liability insurance covers damage caused to a third party by drone operations, including bodily injury and property damage.
How Drone Insurance Works
Drone insurance works in much the same way as many other insurance lines, especially aviation. Insurance companies assess risk in a variety of different ways ranging from reviewing applications and industry data, to performing internet searches.
Many of the fundamental underwriting criteria for drone operators are similar to those for manned aircraft, including the type of aircraft, location to be operated, purpose of operations, and the experience of the pilot. One of the key differentiators is that there is substantially less industry data available about drone accident rates than for manned aircraft. This makes it more difficult to assess risk. “In addition, many UAS operators do not come from an aviation background, so we are faced with a knowledge gap that can be addressed with education and training solutions,” said Bryant.
Considerations For Getting Drone Insurance

There are many factors that affect insurance rates. Some are specific to the operations being performed, such as the type of drone being used (is it a proven system, or is it experimental), the area of operations (are they over water or over urban city centers) and the usage of the drone (analysis of agricultural fields is less risky than shooting concert footage). Others include the experience and credentials of the operator, and the limits of insurance requested.
An increasingly important factor is the extent to which the drone operator implements processes to mitigate risk.
“When underwriting a new UAS client, we are looking for professional operators who are operating within the current regulatory framework,” said Bryant. “Operators that have structured standard operating procedures, who regularly engage in training activities, and operate reliable systems will earn the most competitive insurance rates.”
Training is one of the most important ways operators can reduce risk and reduce insurance premiums. “We are interested to see how fully the industry adopts training standards,” said Bryant. “We feel that some of the heightened exposures, such as operating in hazardous areas, will dictate higher levels of flight experience and recurrent training.”
Drone operators can reduce risk of accident and get more competitive insurance rates by implementing safety management systems (SMS) that include such things as pre-flight checklists, logbooks and a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP), which are already established components of manned aviation.
“In addition, maintaining a detailed record of flight activities and hours flown will make it easier to build a case for more competitive rates for experienced operators,” said Bryant. Flight logging can help reduce risk on two fronts. “If a drone operator is accused of invading someone’s privacy even though the drone may have not been in that geographic area at the time, flight logs and GPS telematics would be strong evidence in favor of the drone operator,” said Bryant. Secondly, flight logging can be used to help manage fleet maintenance needs and ensure that all aircraft completing operations are airworthy.
As the commercial drone industry develops more detailed training and risk management standards over time, both insurance companies and technology such as automated flight logging and geofencing are likely to play a role.
In light of the evolving standards, Bryant recommends this guiding principle:
“Treat an unmanned aircraft system the same way you would treat a manned aircraft,” said Bryant. “Give it the same respect and professional dedication.”
Where to Learn More
For more information about Part 107, check out our summary and test prep recommendations. To learn more about Global Aerospace’s perspective on insurance for the commercial drone industry read their white papers here.
Try DroneDeploy
Want to learn how DroneDeploy can help your business? Visit www.dronedeploy.com or request a consultation with one of our representatives. The DroneDeploy mobile application is available for free download for both iOS and Android devices.
Just got your Part 107 remote pilot’s certificate? Attach your certificate when you email sales@dronedeploy.com and get 15% off a DroneDeploy Business Annual Plan — our way of celebrating your achievement and thanking new customers.

Stop Putting Off Getting Renters Insurance — The Bold Italic — San Francisco
By Jessica Saia

You probably heard about the five-alarm fire that destroyed an apartment building under construction in Mission Bay last night. It was SF’s largest fire in a while, but there have been several devastating fires in the past few years. The last three times I’ve put an open room in my apartment on Craigslist, I’ve gotten responses from people with the subject line: “MY HOUSE BURNED DOWN.” My new roommate moving in this weekend was one of the 21 people displaced by the warehouse fire on 14th and Stevenson from back in January, and we also interviewed two other people who were displaced by either the same fire or one from late last year.
Hearing about last night’s fire and meeting all these people who’ve lost their homes because of fires seems like a good time to remind everyone to actually get renters insurance.
Renters insurance is both really easy to get, and really easy to put off getting. It lingered on my to-do list for two years before I finally got it. It was in October last year, after I witnessed the three-alarm fire that burned two apartment buildings on Valencia St. If that wasn’t enough reason, the next morning at brunch, I realized the table next to me was full of some of the now homeless tenants from those buildings. “See these socks? I got them at H&M yesterday. This shirt? New. Underwear? New. I have nothing. Well, except for this outfit.” Overhearing their conversation made me realize that one day, I might suddenly have to find a new apartment and replace every single thing in it. An hour later, I signed up for renters insurance.
Renters insurance is crazy cheap (between about $8 — $20 a month, depending on your plan), and it covers more than you might think. I researched several companies and chose the one with a basic plan that covered what I needed. Here’s generally what renters insurance will cover:
Your Stuff
You can choose coverage limits (basic is about $15,000, but if you really sit down and tally up everything you own, $25,000 — $30,000 might make more sense.) It’s a little bit more expensive (still dirt cheap), but pick a “reimbursement” plan over a “cash value” plan. Cash value plans pay you the depreciated value of what your stuff was worth, whereas reimbursement plans pay you what it will cost to replace your belongings with new items.
You don’t need receipts, but it’s a good idea to just go around and take a video of your apartment. You’d be surprised how difficult it is to recall everything you own once it’s gone.
Your bike
If your bike gets stolen, even far away from your apartment, renters insurance can cover that as well.
Stuff in your car / Stuff when you travel
If your car gets broken into and your stuff is stolen out of it, or if your stuff gets stolen when you’re traveling, some plans will cover the items up to 10% of coverage. (So, if i have a $25,000 plan, I can use $2,500 to cover my stuff out and about.)
Liability
If someone comes to your apartment and falls down the stairs, they could potentially sue you. Renters insurance covers liability for legal fees or other people’s medical expenses. Even if your dog bites an extremely litigious neighbor, you’re covered.
Emergency expenses/”Loss of use”
Let’s say your house burns down tonight. With most renters insurance, you’ll get a check for “emergency expenses” like a hotel, clothes, food etc. And let’s say your house is unlivable and you have to find a temporary place to live while it’s getting rebuilt? Policies can cover the difference in your rent for up to a year.
If knocking on wood is working for you, great, but if you’ve been meaning to get renters insurance but haven’t gotten around to it, just get around to it. Having your house robbed or catch fire is going to suck either way, but at least with insurance, it would suck so much less!
Photo by Emma Beanson

Health insurance corporations add no value whatsoever to the process of medicine delivery. None Hillary Clinton
100 Letters to Senator Hillary Clinton
From the nomination to the 2016 election, there are 100 days. I intend to write one letter each day to Hillary Clinton…medium.com

Nationwide Dead-Kid Super Bowl Ad Is Here To Terrify Parents Into Buying Insurance
CREDIT: SCREENSHOT, YOUTUBE, “MAKE SAFE HAPPEN”
The real losers of last night’s Super Bowl? Nationwide Insurance, the brilliant minds behind the most universally-hated commercial of the night.
 
Fade in on a little boy with that Almost Famous shaggy haircut, describing all the things he’ll never do: ride a bike, get married, travel the world. Why won’t he live this fulfilling, beautiful life? Because, he tells us, “Because I died from an accident.” CUT TO: An overflowing bathtub along with the words “The number one cause of childhood deaths is preventable accidents” on the screen, as a calm female voiceover assures us that, “At Nationwide, we believe in protecting what matters most: your kids.”

Damn, Nationwide. Surely parents of children who died are feeling better now because they know that if only they’d bought Nationwide insurance they wouldn’t have experienced that “preventable” loss. What an excellent use of $6.75 million.
Perhaps realizing that the commercial did not go over well with its target demographic of human beings, Nationwide released a statement just after the end of the game. It read:
Preventable injuries around the home are the leading cause of childhood deaths in America. Most people don’t know that. Nationwide ran an ad during the Super Bowl that started a fierce conversation. The sole purpose of this message was to start a conversation, not sell insurance. We want to build awareness of an issue that is near and dear to all of us-the safety and well being of our children. We knew the ad would spur a variety of reactions. In fact, thousands of people visited MakeSafeHappen.com, a new website to help educate parents and caregivers with information and resources in an effort to make their homes safer and avoid a potential injury or death. Nationwide has been working with experts for more than 60 years to make homes safer. While some did not care for the ad, we hope it served to begin a dialogue to make safe happen for children everywhere.
The last thing we need is for anyone to instigate a “conversation” that will only heighten the fears parents already feel. No one needs help visualizing the worst case scenario. The language in this statement is, if possible, even more off-putting than the ad itself: Nationwide wants us to know that “the sole purpose” of the message was to get everyone talking about safety. It’s not about selling insurance! That would be so crass. How dare anyone suggest such a thing.
Today’s most-lamented style of childcare isn’t lax parenting; it’s helicopter parenting. Overparenting is the order of the day: too much fear and not enough risk, too much supervision and not enough independence, too much Purell and not enough germs. We ban swings on playgrounds, chapstick, sunscreen. We’re socialized to see danger in the most innocuous places.
Even if Nationwide’s 47-second spot were thoughtful and effective (obviously, it’s not), it would be sparking the opposite of the intervention from which viewers could benefit. We could use an intervention about the fact that a mother who leaves her child lone to play in a park, out of necessity and with a cell phone for emergencies, can get arrested for “unlawful conduct towards a child” and thrown in jail. We should be talking about how kids who walk to school sans direct parental supervision can get picked up by the cops and be questioned by CPS workers, and their parents can be investigated by the police.
What we don’t really need is a reminder that gut-wrenching accidents happen every day. Everyone already knows that. And even if we lived in some alternate reality where we didn’t know that, would this really be the ideal venue to bring it up? Sandwiched between Kim Kardashian’s data plan and a life-size game of Pac-Man? 
 
This about sums up the popular reaction:



So things are not too great with humans, but don’t worry: we’ll always have the Budweiser puppy, and that one dancing shark who didn’t learn Katy Perry’s choreography.

No, Obamacare Won’t Cover Every Drug — Just Like Every Other Insurance Policy
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
By Igor Volsky

Critics of the Affordable Care Act have gone from complaining that the new health care law won’t guarantee that Americans can keep their existing insurance policies and medical providers to arguing that they may have to give up their prescription drug benefits as well.
Consider the latest from Scott Gottlieb. In a piece titled, No, You Can’t Keep Your Drugs Either published at Forbes, Gottlieb — who also appeared on Fox News to tout the argument — writes that policies sold through the ACA’s exchanges don’t include unlimited drug coverage and may force patients to pay out-of-pocket for certain medications:
Simply put, many drugs may not be covered at all, and the costs patients incur by buying them with cash won’t count against out of pocket caps. This has repercussions for drug makers with big portfolios of specialty and primary care drugs (more on that later). But most of all, it has implications for patients. […]
The out of pocket caps on consumer spending only apply to costs incurred on drugs that are included on a plan’s drug formulary. This is the list of medicines that the health plans have agreed to provide some coverage for. If the drug isn’t on this formulary list, then the patient could be responsible for its full cost (with little or no co-insurance to help offset that cost). Moreover, the money they spend won’t count against their deductibles or out of pocket limits ($12,700 for a family, $6,350 for an individual).
Under the law, insurers must offer drug benefits as part of 10 essential health care benefits, meaning that millions of uninsured Americans will now have drug coverage for the very first time. But the coverage won’t be limitless. Insurers will continue to rely on drug formularies — as they currently do in the private market and Medicare Part D — to decide which prescriptions are covered and which are not.
The ACA requires that issuers provide the greater of one drug from each category or class, or offer as many drugs in each category as are covered by a benchmark plan. The law allows states the choice of four different benchmarks, which Gottlieb helpfully lists in his article: 1) One of the three largest small group plans in the state by enrollment; 2) one of the three largest state employee health plans by enrollment; 3) one of the three largest federal employee health plan options by enrollment; or 4) the largest HMO plan offered in the state’s commercial market by enrollment.
States — not the federal government — select the benchmark and insurers then offer coverage for the drugs listed in those formularies. “What the vast majority of states have chosen is a common small business plan, so you know it’s saying what will be available in the exchanges and in the individual market generally is what’s popular among small businesses now and that seems like a reasonable place to start,” the Kaiser Family Foundation’s Larry Levitt explained.
But yes, there are certain limits: a formulary, for instance, may cover three drugs for treating a certain condition but not two others. Obamacare — like all insurers currently operating in the market — has a fix for that. ACA regulations demand that a health plan must have an “exceptions process” in place that allows patients to request and gain access to clinically appropriate drugs that aren’t covered by the health plan (in addition to internal and external appeal processes). So, if a health plan does not cover a particular drug that a patient absolutely needs, their doctor can certify medical necessity to extend coverage. Insurers have relied on drug formularies before the law went into effect and already have exceptions processes in place, meaning that most “will not have to implement significant changes.”
In his piece, Gottlieb illustrates the narrowness of some formularies this way: “I found one plan in North Carolina that doesn’t cover Actonel for osteoporosis, Aubagio for multiple sclerosis, or Xeljanz for severe rheumatoid arthritis, among other ‘non formulary’ drugs.” But as Washington & Lee law professor Tim Jost points out, “This is the way formularies work, we’ve decided we’re going to cover these drugs, but not those drugs… I don’t think you can know anything from seeing what they list as the non formulary drugs without knowing what the formulary is and how fungible those drugs are with the formulary drugs.” Jost notes that drugs within the same category and class are more or less fungible, and so for most people, the drug that’s offered will work as well as the one that isn’t — and is often far cheaper than the name brand option.
“A bigger problem for the insured is going to be co-sharing,” Jost admitted. But “If Gottlieb thinks that ‘s a bad idea then let him ask his Senators and Representatives to sponsor legislation to provide low deductible plans as qualified health plans, I think that’s a great idea, but it’s going to cost a lot of money.”
“The Affordable Care Act struck a balance here,” Levitt added. “There is a wide range of plans available to people with some people providing much more coverage, but at higher premiums, and then a minimum level of coverage that is really the kind of catastrophic coverage that conservatives have long advocates.”
And therein lies the irony of the attack: Republicans have traditionally seen high deductibles and limited coverage as a way to control individual health care spending. Now that Obamacare gives patients that choice, they’re suddenly complaining that the insurance is not generous enough.

Access to buying insurance is not health coverage
Nurses Join “Our First Stand: Save Health Care” National Day of Action Jan. 15, 2017 — San Francisco, California
By RoseAnn DeMoro
A signature exchange early in the first Senate hearing Wednesday for Rep. Tom Price in his nomination to be the next Health and Human Services Secretary illustrates a lot about our still damaged healthcare system, and how it could now get much worse.
Sen. Bernie Sanders, whose call to expand coverage through an improved Medicare for all was a centerpiece of his presidential campaign, forcefully challenged Price to commit to guaranteed healthcare for every American.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MOIvVu6_AIc
Sanders: The United States of America is the only major country on earth that does not guarantee healthcare to all people as a right. Do you believe that healthcare is a right of all Americans, whether they are rich or they’re poor? Should people, because they are Americans, be able to go to the doctor, be able to go into a hospital because they are Americans? In Canada, in other countries, all people have the right to get healthcare. Do you believe we should move in that direction?
Price: I believe that every single American has access to the highest quality care and coverage that is possible.
Sanders. ‘Has access to’ does not mean that they are guaranteed health care. I have access to buying a $10 million home; I don’t have the money to do that.
Unpack the evasions and you have the Ayn Rand-Tea Party philosophy in a nutshell. You only deserve the healthcare you can buy, from private insurance companies that have a history of price gouging with multiple restrictions on the care you can receive even after paying your premiums.
“Access to care” in the mouths of those devoted to shredding every vestige of our healthcare safety net only serves as a pointed reminder of the elevation of double speak for an incoming administration whose press secretary, Sean Spicer, can praise the “totality of diversity” that is “second to none” for a Cabinet where 13 of 16 nominees are white men. Or perhaps Spicer just meant the “diversity” of both millionaires and billionaires.
Any notion that the private healthcare market, which has long prioritized its profiteering above any guarantees of access, cost, or quality, will somehow do a better job of assuring “every person the financial feasibility to purchase the coverage they want” requires a suspension of disbelief that is truly Orwellian.
Probably the best evidence of the failure of the market-driven system — which saw the U.S. fall to 37th in the world according to a World Health Organization ranking early in this century — is the decades long push for major healthcare reform.
The Affordable Care Act was a step forward, especially in access, through the expansion of Medicaid for many low and moderate income adults, and a ban on some of the worst insurance abuses that permitted more people to buy insurance plans through the ACA market exchanges.
Significant holes in the ACA, especially the failure to adequately control out of pocket costs for millions of people, opened the door to much of the attacks, as hypocritical as the ideological resistance has been from those in Congress to a plan that was evolved from conservative think tanks and designed to meet the desires of the healthcare industry.
Now, with the rush to repeal the ACA, things are in danger of getting very ugly fast.
Incoming President Trump did throw a wrench into the feeding frenzy in a series of statements insisting that the Republican majorities in the Senate and House adopt a concurrent replacement plan with repeal of the ACA.
Further he set conditions, that no one lose coverage they’ve gained under the ACA, and that premiums and deductibles be lowered.
That has made it sticky for the repeal and replace crowd. Not one scheme they have talked about the past eight years comes close to meeting those barometers.
Not health savings accounts or tax credits to buy insurance without any controls on the predatory pricing practices of the industry.
Not “selling insurance across state lines” which is merely a race to the bottom, letting insurance giants decamp in the least regulated states so that other states, with stronger public protections, must accept those same lowered standards.
And not converting Medicaid to block grants, which Price, and now Trump as well, are proposing as a “solution” for expanded coverage.
The Medicaid block grant proposal is intended to sharply reduce federal funding for Medicaid, and then leave it to states, more than half now controlled by conservative budget hawks, to reduce their commitment to health coverage for low and moderate income people by restricting eligibility and cutting covered benefits.
Sanders also pressed Price on whether he would adhere to another Trump promise not to cut Medicare and Medicaid.
And then there was this exchange, where Sanders pointed out another Trump call for increased negotiations to reduce prescription drug prices, which would be a sharp u-turn for Congressional conservatives who have repeatedly blocked the ability of Medicare to negotiate discounts as most other countries do.
Sanders: Will you work with us so that Medicare negotiates prices with the pharmaceutical industry?
Price: You have my commitment to work with you and others to make certain that the drug pricing is reasonable and that individuals have access to the medications that they need.
There he goes again. “Access” to medications may mean you can stand in a pharmacy and admire the drugs on the shelves, but it still does not mean you can afford the massive price gouging to get them.


Risk, Insurance, and the Location Domain
By Simon Thompson, Esri
Recently I had the chance to work with one of the world’s largest insurers on improving their business processes. In discussing insurance workflows and data, we all recognized that every twenty-first century dataset contains location. What our sessions highlighted was the fact that every business process in insurance requires location data. The more we explored business units, governance, data management systems and the way people work, the more we hit on the notion of the location domain. Let me explain.
Domain describes a discrete set of land or computers that share a common purpose, owner or role. It’s also a sphere of knowledge, influence, or activity. The location domain is the influence of location within these business activities and systems, how it enables new or improved knowledge and can drive significant process improvement.
Fooled into Complacency
Think about risks and insured people and assets. Risks are often indistinct; they influence a large area without an exact or precise boundary. The insured are more discrete — they contain an address, a building, property, or asset which can be identified to a known location somewhere in the world. This has led many of us into a false sense of security about the accuracy of location specific data.
Fault lines don’t understand ZIP codes. Risk can’t be carefully organized by ZIP code centroids. Here, risk follows the proximity of insured to the fault lines.
I often see data at a ZIP code or postal unit level. Whole neighborhoods are grouped together on the arbitrary geographies designed to help postal workers deliver mail. This information is not created or used to summarize people, their demographics, or how things change. Worse, I’ve seen lots of analysis which uses the center of these arbitrary shapes to perform analysis such as how far is the coast, a fault line, or fire hazard.
When we look at insurance, many times the people within these boundaries are treated the same — as if all risks are equal but change dramatically at the edge. Some US ZIP codes are huge. Tonopah, Nevada is a little larger than the state of Maryland. It encompasses 10,000 square miles and is the largest ZIP code in the lower 48 conterminous United States. Obviously, the risk located in this ZIP code will not be the same over all these miles.
The shape of a ZIP code also impacts analysis and location accuracy. The center, or centroid, is often not in the middle of the actual shape. We need detailed understanding of a shape’s topology to make sure a point is placed correctly in the center within the shape itself.
Take a look at the diagram below. This diagram shows real parcel outlines from a small street near my house. Look at how geocoding techniques and parcel geometry give different answers for the same set of inputs.
Depending on how a center point is derived, the actual placement can vary greatly.
Better Business Practices Need Updated Data
Does all this matter? Yes, a lot. Too often we assume that location is just another attribute in our spreadsheets and databases. Many times, after the location data is created it’s never updated. Revisions and edits aren’t edited or tracked. As a result, we lose understanding of what’s changed and why. You’d never do that with your policy pricing — so why let it happen to the geography of that policy?
I’ve seen lat-longs in policy dataset that were created 25 years ago. They were built with geocoding software which interpolated evenly along a road or used maps that are now more than 50 years old.
Today’s data is orders of magnitude better. We have near global coverage at street level. In every developed country you can find a house, business, or address easily. There’s a marker placed on its true location that was either measured by a vehicle, surveyed on the ground, taken from hi-resolution satellites, or hand-positioned by a human expert from up-to-date, authoritative maps. No more interpolation — an inexact science at best and damaging to a company’s reputation and bottom line at worse.
So have companies gone back and updated their data as geocoding and address management have changed? In most cases no. If there’s a lat-long it survived pretty much untouched since the data was first created. Just about every other descriptive information might have changed in them but the location doesn’t because it is in our minds, a static location on the earth.
This isn’t acceptable anymore. The way we create and manage location references has changed so much that the lat-long we got from old geocoding systems may turn out to be somewhere else entirely.
Are You False-Confident in Your Geo-Data?
Look, people have a false confidence in location data. There’s no escaping this fact. So when there’s been a merger or acquisitions, or new business processes have been written to move policies around, the geographic data and accuracy usually is not reassessed.
If your data is bad you’re going to end up with bad business.
Good data governance is important. Insurance organizations have been leaders in developing ‘systems of record’. But geospatial data has been the dirty little secret — often ignored and unwashed. When we build pricing and loss models we agonize over model accuracy and fit. But we often ignore the error at source — geographic uncertainty.
Map of positional uncertainty by policies grouped at census tract level.
So I’m proposing that we look at the location domain again and how it impacts the way insurers manage data. Cleaning up location data is far easier than most people imagine. There are powerful tools to automate and refresh this. Better data sources and more sophisticated ways to truly find the target address means you get renewed precision and accuracy. The bottom line is that companies can get new surety in all their processes. I’m not denying it can take a few man months, but the benefits pay off.
Authoritative location domains link enterprise workflows and systems together. When you have a location strategy you can easily provide changes. You make sure changes propagate across all your systems and the processes that use them. This means your data keeps getting progressively better and your ability to rely on information improves.
Where does this leave you? It means you move from fearing uncertainty to embracing accuracy. Accuracy that flows through all your systems — actuarial, underwriting, claims, and agency — at the point of execution or in new strategies. And all this comes about because you had the foresight and confidence to realize you needed to dust off your geo-fields and datasets. Now wouldn’t that be a refreshing change?
Originally published at blogs.esri.com on September 29, 2015.

IMAGE: Ivelin Radkov — 123RF
Technology, innovation and… the insurance sector
An interesting article in Techcrunch, “Tech and the changing face of insurance” reminded me of my work with a number of companies in the sector, both in Spain and beyond, many of which display the typical symptoms of consolidated industries subject to regulation.
In the first place, the insurance industry needs to take a long hard look at what it does. This is a sector within which many companies still see innovation in terms of the internet replacing some of the traditional channels it uses as intermediaries (or worse, simply that the market will take this decision for them). It tends to see cost comparison sites as players to bear in mind (with some companies investing or developing them), while questioning the client relationship model (typically based on a problem or something on the social networks that threatens a company’s relationship)… in short, not a pro-active approach. The banking equivalent are those institutions that for years only applied technology and innovation to banking operations, instead of thinking about the many possibilities that technology offers to rethink their activities.
The point of the Techcrunch article is that new situations, new gadgets and new possibilities mean insurance companies are going to have to rethink what they do and how they do it. If we are now able to use hoverboards that burst into flames, if we carshare with strangers or use driverless vehicles, stay in homes belonging to people we’ve never met or rent them to strangers, fly drones that can weigh more than a kilogram with no previous experience, or connect our homes up to all sorts of devices, then it’s pretty obvious we’re going to be facing situations where insurance companies could play an important role.
Saying that we live in rapidly changing times, that people are adopting new habits, or that new products are appearing constantly is as much of a cliché as the use of the term VUCA (Volatility, Uncertainty, Complexity, and Ambiguity) in business schools. But should an insurance company set aside resources to study new situations where it could provide value, even if initially this is only residual? The answer is an unequivocal yes, and not just because of the money to be made, but also because of the “corporate gymnastics” preparing to do so will require.
But beyond the possibility of a company or companies attaining first mover advantage, we also need to remember that we’re talking here about companies that have been around for many, many years, that are highly regulated, and have their own long-established procedures that everybody follows.
If the environment changes at a certain speed, your company will have to match that pace, otherwise it will lose its competitive edge and its ability to capture and retain talent. An insurance company today needs to be aware of every technological development that can create an environment within which it can develop its activity — which is just about any — and to be the first to explore them so as to be able take advantage of them. Anything else is not innovation, so much as smoke and mirrors or simply ticking boxes.
(En español, aquí)

Obamacare Drastically Increased The Number Of LGBT Americans With Health Insurance
CREDIT: CENTER FOR AMERICAN PROGRESS
The implementation of the Affordable Care Act, a.k.a. Obamacare, has had a huge impact on the LGBT community’s ability to access health insurance. According to a new report from the Center for American Progress, the uninsured rate among LGBT individuals who makes about $44,000 or less fell from 34 to 26 percent. This was actually a greater improvement than was found in the general population, where the uninsured rate dropped from 27 to 20 percent.
Obamacare particularly impacted those with lower incomes. Among LGBT individuals who make between $15,000 and $22,000, the uninsured rate declined by 18 percentage points, thanks to the insurance subsidies and Medicaid expansions provided by the law.
Not all LGBT people benefited the same, however. People who identify as bisexual only saw a 2 percent dip in uninsured rates, from 29 to 27 percent. Transgender people saw a dramatic 24 percent drop, but the uninsured rate among that community remains quite high at 35 percent.
According to the report, discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity is still a significant barrier to LGBT people obtaining health insurance coverage. Because no federal law exists to protect LGBT people from employment discrimination, many enter unemployment or take low-wage jobs that do not include insurance benefits. Marriage inequality also limits LGBT individuals’ ability to access coverage through a spouse or partner. Only 38 percent of LGBT people in the studied income bracket had insurance through a partner benefit, compared to 58 percent of the general population.
LGBT people also experience discrimination from insurance carriers themselves. The report found that 8 percent of gay respondents experienced discrimination through a carrier, and another 8 percent struggled to obtain coverage because of a pre-existing condition, including a significant number who were denied coverage because of their HIV status.
There is good news on the horizon, though. New provisions will soon take effect that will allow Obamacare to serve LGBT people even better. Starting January 1, the law requires that any insurance plan that provides spousal or family coverage be offered to same-sex spouses under identical conditions, including couples who married in any state where it’s legal to do so, regardless of where they now live. State insurance commissioners are also increasingly issuing guidance prohibiting transgender exclusions in plans, helping increase access for that particularly vulnerable population.
A group of LGBT organizations have also proposed a Healthcare Bill of Rights, helping the community identify discrimination when it happens and encouraging them to find services that meet all their unique medical needs.
The report concludes that the first year of Obamacare’s implementation “shows great promise, but much work remains to be done to ensure that the benefits of the health reform efforts reach all who need them, including LGBT people and their families.” Read the full report for more insights about how the LGBT community has interacted with Obamacare.

Florida Doctor Arrested Protesting Allianz Championship Golf Tourney, Insurance Giant Refuses To Release Holocaust Era Policy Holder Names

This past weekend, the PGA Senior Tour event sponsored by Allianz attracted unusual attention on the ground, and in the air.
“I bought a ticket to the event and was merely exercising my free speech rights to show how unfair it is that Allianz is prospering, but so many survivors are living in poverty,” said Dr. Jay Lieberman who was arrested, who is himself, the son of Holocaust survivors.
The Doctor stands accused of trespassing at the Allianz golf event.
On Sunday, February 7, a banner flown from a plane boldly proclaimed: “Allianz Owes Holocaust Survivors $2.5 Billion” while Holocaust survivors, their children and grandchildren and many strong supporters demonstrated outside the Allianz Championship Golf Tournament held in Boca Raton’s Broken Sound Country Club.
During the Holocaust, millions of Jews were deported and ultimately killed in work camps and death camps. This left little ability to preserve and maintain policy paperwork, when entire families with multiple generations were involuntarily incarcerated. Allianz has already confirmed publicly that they insured Nazi death camps and Jewish ghettos, and Nazi factories, motor pools and barracks.
The South Florida community of Boca Raton and neighboring Boynton Beach has over 100,000 residents of Jewish descent, which makes the choice of venues even more exasperating to the protesters. The Holocaust Survivors Foundation USA is a coalition of elected survivor leaders from New York, Los Angeles, Boston, Las Vegas, Connecticut, Washington DC, and South Florida, which has organized the protest this past weekend, and does a lot more than fighting insurance companies on behalf of many Holocaust survivors.

Many of the aggrieved policy holders and HSF members live in South Florida, but some are as far flung as Brooklyn, Los Angeles, Boston, Las Vegas and Virginia — and that’s just the ‘s executive committee, many of whom are not policy holders, but all of whom survived Nazi terror.
Allianz’s unpaid policy holders span the globe.
Multiple organizations have been pursuing relief and racing the clock as an aging population of holocaust survivors and their families seek to beat the clock to gain relief during the lifetime of the afflicted, fully half of whom are destitute.
These aren’t protesters and claimants seeking reparations or handouts, but regular people whose insurance contracts have been nearly impossible to enforce for decades, requiring diplomatic, legal and political pursuit at the highest levels.
In 1998 the insurance industry formed an “International Commission” whose announced purpose was to voluntarily publish the names of the insured and resolve claims on a “voluntary basis” which led to payment of 3% of the total amount estimated owed by European insurance companies after 9 long years. Allianz AG participated and paid a total of roughly $29 Million in claims of the estimated $2.5 Billion owed to policy holders. Separately, Allianz made large contributions to Jewish groups high minded names such as the “American Jewish Committee” and the “Jewish Foundation for the Righteous” whose members were unaffected directly by Nazi Genocide and are not survivors organizations.
Allianz pursued these groups in the interest of laundering their brand name, but now the law backs them up.
Huffpost Live covered the 2013 protest of the Allianz Golf Championship with a studio interview of Holocaust survivor Ivar Segalowitz who’s been unable to pursue his claims. He was 11 years old when his family was deported to a concentration camp, leaving him unable to even determine if his family was covered by a policy. However, he said then that his family lived a typical upper middle class lifestyle and he was certain that members of his extended family or parents would’ve carried such insurance.
Allianz, AG refuses all requests to make rosters of policy holders known.
Mr. Segalowitz succumbed to cancer in 2014 having never received information from Allianz.
Ivar Segalowitz was the arrested Dr. Lieberman’s father-in-law.
“Most of my father’s family was murdered in Treblinka. My father-in-law Ivar Segalowitz was the sole survivor of a wealthy Lithuanian family. He survived Dachau, Auschwitz-Birkenau, and Buchenwald, and served in the U.S. military after emigrating to this country,” said Dr. Lieberman, “Despite his mother, grandmother, aunt, and uncle’s names listed among German insurance holders, U.S. law barred him from going to court to reclaim his family legacy.”
“A US court ruling effectively placed policy holders into circumstances where an Act of Congress has become their last resort to open the courthouse doors. Not to gain repayment, but solely to allow a court to hear the cases of these policyholders,” says the Doctor.
As if to underscore the huge monumental barriers facing victims’ families pursuing political nature of these remaining claims, Dr. Lieberman says that, “Ivar’s daughter, Genie Lieberman, testified about Ivar in Congress before Reps. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen and Ted Deutch in 2014.” Since then, intense lobbying by the current Administration in the White House, the insurance industry and groups benefiting from the status quo have combined to stalemate the survivors’ efforts.

Meanwhile, the German insurance giant Allianz continues to host golf tournaments and dominates the trip insurance industry. Few of its customers realize that the company and its affiliates grew wealthy insuring Nazi Germany, but refuse to honor policies of Jewish families. Allianz also tried to sponsor the New Meadowlands Stadium outside New York in 2008 causing an uproar for the very same reasons.
The Holocaust Survivors Foundation USA has compiled a list of four demands its protesters for relief from Allianz:
Publish the names of all Allianz and affiliates’ insurance policy holders between 1920 and 1945 on the internet.
Publish all insurance records of Nazi German institutions including, the SS, concentration and death camp, and personnel and all other war related business between 1933 and 1945.
Immediately cease any lobbying against Holocaust survivors and heirs to bring legal action in U.S. courts.
Disgorge2.5 billion, representing its unjust enrichment from unpaid insurance policies from the Holocaust, to be paid to beneficiaries and heirs and to fund social services for Holocaust survivors in need worldwide.
Further factual information was provided to the Huffington Post by the Holocaust Survivors Foundation USA in 2013.
According to data provided to Congress, a total of over $21 billion in today’s value remains unpaid from all insurers, including not only Allianz, but Italy’s Generali, AXA of France, and others.
Despite legislation with a bipartisan group of 115 co-sponsors in 2012 that passed the House Foreign Affairs Committee unanimously, the measure never made it to the floor of the full House. Allianz, Generali, the Dutch Insurance Association, the American Insurance Association, Zurich, ING, and Swiss Re all lobbied against the legislation. Particularly anguishing to survivors and their families was the opposition from the American Jewish Committee, the Anti-Defamation League, Bnai Brith International, the Conference on Jewish Material Claims Against Germany, the World Jewish Congress, and the World Jewish Restitution Organization.
Meanwhile, Dr. Lieberman must go to court in March on misdemeanor charges for speaking out, while ironically the numerous survivors await their day in court, if Congress finally goes through with a long delayed bill just to open the courthouse doors.
If they ever get their day in court.
Meanwhile, Allianz Group earned $11.7 Billion dollars in 2014 — the lastest year for which we have figures — and served 85,000,000 customers who have little clue that their insurer grew rich denying legitimate policy holder claims, when Holocaust survivors needed that insurance the most.

The Competitive Health Insurance Reform Act (H.R. 372)
3/22/2017
Since the 1940’s health insurers have been exempt from federal antitrust laws. We’ve allowed states to develop their own regulations to oversee the insurance market.
Since many insurers now operate nationally rather than just on a state level, this is no longer an effective strategy to promote competition. Today, I voted for the Competitive Health Insurance Reform Act (H.R. 372) which would eliminate this antitrust exemption.
This will help promote competition and choice amongst insurers. While this bill isn’t the silver bullet that will fix health care in America, it is a step in the right direction that I support.

A good point, because I meant to write a post about the Getting Life Insurance Process and forgot! Thanks for the reminder.

Insurance is a risky business if you don’t move with the tech times
The sun is setting on the old way of doing insurance but there is a bright new dawn for those who harness data to innovation new business models
Insurance is a tough business to love from a customer point of view. It’s all about spending money on something from which we’d rather not see the value. We buy a policy not wanting to make a claim on it — we don’t want to have a car accident or have our house burgled or become seriously ill. Furthermore, insurance itself doesn’t protect us from such events — it protects us from the consequences.
Nevertheless, we want a sense of value for money from the premium we pay for cover. This can make it hard to pin down exactly what value looks like. A cheap price? The level and detail of cover? For most it’s probably a compromise between the two. Then there is the mutual suspicion that exists as we negotiate this transaction. Will the company try and squirm out of paying up on a technicality? Are we, as customers, always completely honest in the information we submit? As a result a gulf exists between them and us. In most cases, our contact is limited to the points of purchase and renewal — or in the event of a claim.
Our relationship with insurance and the very nature of cover is changing rapidly, though. Technology is re-writing the rules of engagement offering opportunities for innovation from start-ups as well as established sectors we wouldn’t normally associate with insurance. The venerable giants of the industry are being challenged to keep pace or face being left behind, overtaken by agile upstarts.
Smartphone apps, wearable tech and the ability to connect just about anything to the Internet of Things enables the creation of data streams from whatever is insurable. The result is detailed, up-to-date information on which to calculate risk and price insurance. All of this is good news for you and me.
The Internet of Insured Things
There appears to be a ready appetite for the resulting disruptive forces. A report by Boston Consulting Group and Morgan Stanley found that 50% of consumers would consider switching to new innovative business models. Technology, of course, is the key enabler of those models. The BCG/Morgan Stanley report foresees a world in which 80% to 100% of new cars will be connected and almost everything in a typical home could put online.
“The significant impending change creates major opportunities for insurers that are looking to embrace it, but also poses significant risks for the laggards,” the report says. “Cheap, connected sensors have the potential to transform the insurance offering — be it in motor, home, health insurance, or industrial settings.”
The report’s key forecast is the growing role of ‘ecosystems’ — interactions between a network of companies, individuals and institutions in the delivery of services. It highlights the current low level of interaction with customers compared with other industries — the result of the traditional and impersonal annual contact approach. Consumer behaviour and expectations are changing and the report recommends a “step change” in the way insurers engage their customers.
Accenture draws very similar conclusions in its Technology Vision for Insurance 2016 report: “(Technologies) could also enable insurers to create new business models based on personalised, real-time assessment of risk rather than using historical data and averaged pricing. Pay-as-you-go and usage-based insurance models, for example, will become more sophisticated in the years to come.”
The report found that “84% of insurers agree that organisations are being increasingly pressed to reinvent themselves and evolve their business before they are disrupted”, with 83% seeing the Internet of Things bringing transformative change to the industry.
The age of delightful insurance?
The insurgent attitude of incoming challengers is exemplified by Lemonade, a peer-to-peer insurance start-up causing a fizz of excitement, with its simple slogan “Insurance that doesn’t suck”. The company is remaining tight-lipped over exactly what products it will bring to market, but for further proof of its ambition to shake things up just look at the declaration on its homepage: “We’ve redesigned insurance from the ground up to make it honest, instant and delightful”. When was the last time you were delighted by an insurance offering? Whatever the details of Lemonade’s business model turn out to be, they are clearly enough to get the money flowing in. The company has attracted $13million in seed funding from Sequoia Capital.
Across the insurance industry, the most fertile and active sector when it comes to innovation and investments has been healthcare, accounting for 56% of insurance tech start-ups between 2010 and 2015, according to CB Insights. In America, a major factor has been the way Obamacare has created new demand and given rise to new markets. But there are many reasons why opportunities for health insurance innovation are plentiful.
We produce huge amounts of accurate and real-time data about ourselves from the apps on our smartphones and wearable tech such as fitness monitors. Everything from workouts, steps walked, hours slept, calories consumed and more. From the insurer’s point of view this is pure gold — detailed, rich data on which to calculate risk instead of a single annual snapshot of circumstances.
The real advantage for them, though, is the advantage they can offer their customers. Instead of being a remote provider of financial cover, insurers can seize the opportunity to build a direct relationship with the customer by becoming their health partner, offering support, advice and incentives to lead a healthier life. A well-known example is Vitality which offers a wellness programme featuring reduced health insurance premiums, discount gym memberships and other lifestyle benefits for members.
Better data on its customers gives Vitality better insight into their lifestyles allowing for better risk assessment. By helping those customers live healthier lives, the company pays out less, reducing costs. Healthier lifestyles for customers are a far more valuable and tangible benefit than mere insurance cover which they hope never to actually claim on. That’s real value, rather than ‘dead money’ spent on a year’s claim-free cover.
Speed up or get overtaken
Motor insurance is slightly different, but there are parallels. Think about the process. When you insure your car you tell the insurance company about yourself, your car and where you keep it. Economy with the truth on a few probing questions, such as driving convictions, medical conditions, annual mileage, could invalidate any future claim.
However, apart from these fairly narrow risk assessment parameters, there is nothing to stop you going on to behave with utter recklessness. As long as the insurer never finds out — though convictions or claim — they can remain blissfully unaware of how inaccurate their risk assessment is. Filling out the forms — on paper or online — has been pretty much the limit of data acquisition. There are no sections asking if you do handbrake turns in the street or drive everywhere at 100mph.
This seems crazy when there is so much better quality, bang-up-to-date data about you, your car, your journeys and many other relevant factors. Connected cars can measure and report back on everything from where and when you travel to how you drive. Not everyone will be comfortable with having Big Brother as a passenger. But it stands to reason that the more information you are prepared to share with an insurer, the more personal they can make their assessment of risk. Accepting certain conditions could lead to lower premiums, which would be especially attractive to people who otherwise would be lumped into higher risk groups, such as young male drivers.
So-called ‘black boxes’ are already popular with young motorists desperate to mitigate crippling new driver premiums under a system in which safe drivers share the cost of insuring the bad ones. An insurer could even use such detailed, live data to offer guidance on becoming a safer driver by highlighting risky habits, warn of a dangerous problem with your car, or if you’ve parked in a high-crime area and forgotten to lock the doors.
In the UK, Guevara is on a mission to start a motor insurance revolution with a peer-to-peer model with a twist. The firm groups drivers together and pools their premiums, which decrease each year depending on claims made. This approach effectively also shares risk among members of the group which — the thinking goes — makes them less likely to make a spurious or exaggerated claim if the impact of doing so is felt by someone they have a connection to.
Metromile targets urban Americans who don’t drive much with pay-per-mile policies. The Metromile Pulse is a device that plugs into a car’s diagnostic port and tracks distance travelled, but it’s not a black box and doesn’t measure other factors such as speed or driving style. It does, though, access engine information which feeds into the accompanying smartphone app, offering diagnostic data and driving statistics in addition to route optimisation and car location features.
It’s all about the data
With access to high quality customer data being the differentiator, the emphasis shifts from the financial ability to underwrite large risk pools and towards the technology that can exploit small ones. That means that tech companies might be better placed to capitalise on those opportunities than established insurance giants. It follows that any company that already has a lot of detailed data on their customers will have an advantage.
The shift will also be in what insurance companies actually are. As with Vitality, rather than being a static financial institution betting against risk of something triggering a claim, they will increasingly play a partnership role, using data not only to price risk but to help customers achieve positive outcomes rather than just protect them against bad ones.
As Accenture puts it: “Insurers can also evolve from providing cover to becoming valued partners that help their customers monitor, mitigate and avoid risk. The result? A more transparent and trusted relationship between insurers and customers. Insurers can interact with customers more frequently than only when they pay or claim, creating positive moments of truth and boosting customer satisfaction in an industry that is becoming increasingly commoditised.”
The shifts under way in the insurance sector represent a perfect example of the win-win outcomes made possible when we harness and unlock personal data. It is not a case of a consumer victory over the greedy corporate giant. Nor is it the little guy having zero control and having to fall in line with an industry-dictated status quo. The potential is to create entirely new models rather than tweak or squeeze old ones — business made truly personal in an industry where a bespoke deal is the ultimate goal of both consumer and provider.
Businesses needs to respect our data and be honest and transparent about how it is used. Regulators must hold them to account and ensure risk assessment is fair and not loaded such that the vulnerable are profiled out of the market.
For companies keen to embrace that kind of openness and honesty and with the ambition to make them real differentiators, there is the opportunity to do something that is better for the customer and better for the business. And given they are in the business of risk, the implications of ignoring such opportunity should be all to clear.
Please hit the ‘heart’ icon below to share this with your network.
More from Internet of Me:
The EU GDPR: When rules and regulations offer businesses a golden opportunity
There are no problems, only opportunities. So goes the saying that is either a mantra of optimism or a trite business…medium.com
The Internet of Things is going to need an Internet of Me
The Internet of Things is going to be big. You might have heard about that.medium.com
From shoe repair to digital identity — putting online on the High Street
Depending on your point of view the idea of digital disruption can have a polarising effect. It’s a new future of…medium.com
Internet of Me is supported and sponsored by digi.me


TechHire Employer Spotlight: National Interstate Insurance, Akron
This interview is the first in TechHire’s Employer Spotlight Series which features employer voices from our TechHire communities. Interview conducted by TechHire Community Engagement Manager Laura Faulkner.
Interview with: Tony Prinzo, Talent Acquisition Manager at National Interstate Insurance 
TechHire Community: Akron, OH
How did you learn about the TechHire initiative? What inspired you to get involved?
We first got involved with TechHire when we were invited to a meeting with ConxusNEO (our TechHire community lead) and local employers. We had an open discussion with business leaders and community members about the tech talent landscape and how we could work together to create a sustainable talent pipeline.
We were just on the forefront of working with our local training provider, the Software Guild, so everything just came together. The energy in the room and the passion for our community was inspiring. It is hard to find a more noble purpose than helping someone attain fulfilling work.
It is hard to find a more noble purpose than helping someone attain fulfilling work.
How have you engaged with TechHire?
We have worked together with the project team to advise on marketing materials, create career pathways, and analyze Burning Glass data. We also hosted a partner meeting onsite at National Interstate Insurance.

In Akron, we have an engaged core group of employers that are very interested in TechHire. A lot of our momentum is on the manufacturing side and not on the tech side, so there is a great opportunity to further engage. ConxusNEO is doing important work and they are an excellent representative of the TechHire brand.
Bringing in local government and C-Suite leaders as champions of this effort would unlock even more potential in our community.
How has partnering with TechHire benefited your company?
Our IT team has grown rapidly with the rest of the business. At one point, we created 12 new jobs and needed to work closely with the business to identify multiple sources for talent. Just as we were talking to the Software Guild, the TechHire initiative was brought to our attention. Our IT leadership was very engaged in exploring candidates from a coding bootcamp. The TechHire brand further reinforced our relationship with the Software Guild. We were now at the table working hand-in-hand with other local business leaders to support the program, as it was producing high-quality candidates.
TechHire is a lot of good people coming together and trying to impact the workforce in a positive way.
So far we’ve hired five employees through the program that have contributed to our growing IT function. The folks we’ve hired come from very unique and diverse backgrounds. Four of the five we’ve hired are still with us — and the one who left was actually recruited away to a local startup. This is a testament to TechHire’s mission and flooding the market with quality IT talent.
The talent that we have acquired as a result of our partnership with TechHire and the Software Guild has contributed to rounding out our IT team. These folks all have the talent and aptitude to be successful software developers, they just needed the right vehicle to make it happen. They have all increased their income and become valuable contributors to National Interstate Insurance Company.
These folks all have the talent and aptitude to be successful software developers, they just needed the right vehicle to make it happen.
We also have enjoyed visibility to community and civic leaders, which has given us an influential voice in the development of workforce strategies within the community. We have been able to fill positions and give our IT leaders accessibility to the Software Guild. TechHire is a lot of good people coming together and trying to impact the workforce in a positive way. I always feel inspired after a meeting.
As a recruiter, what are your thoughts on hiring folks based on skills and potential rather than pedigree and experience?
I would never undervalue formal education or a four-year degree — but skill-based hiring is critical to sustaining the workforce, especially in tech. STEM education is being widely adopted in classrooms across the country and the education landscape is changing as tech jobs become more desirable.
Human resources, recruitment managers, and hiring managers need to be creative and approach talent needs with open minds. Hiring based on skills will help business leaders at all levels to see the value of boot camps and other accelerated training programs.
Hiring based on skills will help business leaders at all levels to see the value of boot camps and other accelerated training programs.
We need to think through what a skills matrix looks like in our community. TechHire is helping focus our efforts around building a strong pipeline of tech talent.
Why do you think your colleagues at other organizations should get involved with TechHire?
TechHire communities will get out what they put in. The resources and mindshare that is a part of TechHire Akron has made our partnership with the Software Guild that much more meaningful.
Is there anything you want to share with job seekers interested in tech careers?
The tech skill gap is real, and anyone who is willing to invest in themselves to develop the skills employers need will be positively impacting their local community and economy.
Join the movement! Get involved with TechHire at techhire.org


Cancel thousands of health insurance plans
The Affordable Care Act has insured 17.6 million people, driving the uninsured rate to record lows.
Yet, all of the GOP presidential candidates propose repealing the Affordable Care Act without offering a comprehensive alternative.
Share on Twitter | Share on Facebook
Quick Facts:
89 percent of Nevada consumers who signed up for the Affordable Care Act in 2015 qualified for an average tax credit of $242 per month through the Marketplace. (Still, 27.9% of Nevadans under the age 65 and below 138 percent of the poverty line lacked health insurance in 2014.) TWEET
From 2013 to 2014, Nevada experienced the largest percentage reduction of uninsured children in the country. TWEET


Monitoring your health and the cost of medical insurance
Aetna, one of the biggest health insurers in the United States, is the first in its sector to announce it will subsidize the cost of wearables and other devices to its customers to help them monitor their health and receive better services.
The insurer will launch a program that only includes Apple devices and will be extended to its more than fifty thousand employees starting in January 2017 and then gradually to both individual and corporate clients. The company has more than twenty-three million customers in the United States, a potential bonanza for Apple.
Aetna recently announced it was curtailing its participation participation in public insurance marketplaces set up by the Affordable Care Act — commonly known as Obamacare — claiming it would lose money. Its latest move could indicate a repositioning of the company to try to focus on customers with higher purchasing power who are prepared to pay a premium for proactive management of their health.
The program will cover a significant portion of the cost of the devices, starting with the Apple Watch, and will finance the rest of the cost by including it in customers’ monthly bills. It will also include specific apps designed by the company for the devices. The scheme will initially be offered to some corporate and individual clients, and gradually rolled out to the rest of its customer base.
The idea is to help its customers manage their health and wellness through information provided by the devices, improve diagnosis and prescription medications, try to increase adherence to treatment through reminders, make available applications to interact more easily with the company and to request, for example, prescriptions, treatments or to consult or request information about bills, as well as develop personalized and supervised health plans.
Last July, Fitbit announced Fitbit Group Health, which aims to offer the same type of services to communities and companies, insurance companies, weight control programs and clinical research. However, Aetna is the first health insurer to announce anything on this scale and include it as part of their policies.
This represents a big change in health management based on a proactive rather than reactive approach: given the current state of technology, access to regular readings of quantitative data such as physical activity, heart rate, estimated level of stress or other metrics that can be obtained by corresponding apps and using sensor devices will undoubtedly have a big effect on health monitoring, and doesn’t make much sense to wait for a problem to arise before trying to manage it, if through appropriate monitoring, it can be successfully prevented.
What’s new about this in reality, is not the monitoring itself, but that an insurance company considers this appraoch sufficiently interesting to become a key player in popularizing such devices, covering part of the cost in the belief that there is money to be made. Standardizing readings by only using the devices produced by a particular brand makes sense by reducing complexity and maximizing the development and efficiency of derivative algorithms. It makes sense that Apple, creator of programs like ResearchKit, be that company.
I’m sure a lot of companies in the industry will be paying attention to the results of this program. Those of us who have been using such devices to monitor our health for some time now, understand the potential. More professional management of such data and additional information will be a turning point in the way that many people manage their health.
(En español, aquí)

Insurance on the Blockchain
For months, I’ve been conjuring up radical visions of a brave new decentralized world with use cases from robotic ants that explore the walls of buildings to what I call “programmable land,” to hospitals that run themselves without administrators and people voting on their cell phones. I’ve tried to think of a way to radically reshape insurance. Aside from the standard disintermediation story, I’ve been drawing a blank for months.
Until last week, when I hit upon an idea that may well change the nature of insurance within a decade. I explained it to some people in the insurance industry yesterday, and they took three pages of hand-written notes. I want to document it here so everyone can get the idea.
Tokens, Tokens Everywhere
I’m working on a project I call the Token Factory, which, although I’m considered a “friend of ConsenSys,” is not the same as ConsenSys’ version of the same name. ConsenSys’ project, which recently soft-launched along with MetaMask, the Ethereum browser add-on, is now available to help people make simple tokens. Mine is not yet online.
The goal is to build a web site anyone can come to, specify a new token, and have a bunch of them in his/her wallet fairly quickly. A token is atransferable unit of value within a system. It is governed by a single person, organization, or consortium. A rail is a token that crosses system boundaries easily. A currency is a token that is accepted by a large number of systems.
Today, we are building fairly simple tokens that represent things like tickets, local currencies, cars, baseball cards, cows, trees, the hours of a consultant’s time, etc. When you trade the token, the ownership (or use of) that thing transfers.
Tomorrow, using Ethereum, we’ll build smart tokens that have all their business logic and regulation compliance built in. And that’s what gets me thinking about insurance.
Insurance Balls
Think of the market for insurance. At the 30,000-foot level, it’s millions and millions of contracts that specify how much a buyer pays in premiums and how much an insurance company pays under what circumstances. These contracts are often complex and sticky — they are custom-made for each customer and each situation. Try making a change to one of your insurance contracts! It can take about as much effort as getting a new one altogether.
Now think of it differently. Think of the market for insurance products as broken into small modules, each of which fundamentally represents an investment. There’s an investor on one side; on the other side is a customer paying a premium, providing an income stream. And in the middle, there’s a specification of risk and payment under various circumstances. Think of these as balls of different colors, sizes, and types. In reality, there aren’t that many different kinds — a few dozen basic types should describe most situations. A policy, then, could be a particular combination of these balls to suit the requirements of a given customer at a given time — sort of like a customer putting the balls into a sack. We could replace our collections of contracts with virtual sacks of these balls.
So here’s the idea: Create tokens that represent small units of insurance, and then let customers come along and put all the units they want into their “insurance wallet.” A smallest unit, for example, could have a $10 monthly premium and pay out as much as, say, $10,000 if conditions are met. Now put these tokens into a marketplace where all investors and consumers can see them. This creates a liquid market with low spreads and no middlemen.
Of course, people wouldn’t choose these small units by hand — they would specify what coverage they want, and software can buy the tokens they need. The tokens trade at market price at all times, depending on various risk factors that can move prices up or down.
Insure-Bits
As a token gesture, I’m going to coin a new term: insure-bits. An insure-bit is a cryptographic token that represents an indivisible unit of insurance of some kind. Presumably, a consortium would taxonomize and standardize the formats for these tokens, so they can unambiguously represent legal contractual agreements. Taking a decentralizing step further, they would actually be legal contractual agreements. Customers and investors would aggregate insure-bits on a common exchange to build portfolios that suit them.
Once we have an insure-bit infrastructure and ecosystem, we get real-time dynamic allocation. That’s right — you could automatically have the exact combination of insurance you need at each moment, and that mix of insure-bits can vary according to circumstances. Your insurance bot could increase your homeowner’s insurance as it learns about potential storms, or it could add to your travel insurance if it knows you’ve just rented a motorcycle. If the value of one of your assets goes up (as determined by an oracle — see below), that could trigger the purchase of some more insure-bits. Keep in mind that dynamic allocation also involves dynamic pricing — you’ll find that the insurance you want to buy in a hurry may be significantly more expensive than before, when you didn’t need it.
The Google-ization of Insurance
In essence, this is what Google did to advertising. While advertisers were buying big media campaigns that included banner ads as part of the mix, Google broke every single search word down into its own little market and sold the words at market price. This is the atomization of advertising — by breaking everything down into the smallest possible unit, it’s easy for buyers to purchase what they want when they want it, and they can specify in fairly sophisticated ways how much they are willing to pay for various words under various conditions. Whatever insure-bits you have in your portfolio at the exact time of the fire, or the car accident, or the cancellation of your flight determines your payoff.
Similarly, the obligations these tiny tokens represent can be traded on the back end as well. They can be assembled, modeled, tested, collateralized, and securitized in real time to meet the needs of various investors. The fact that both investors and customers are constantly trading these things has no impact on the market, since a double-spend is impossible and we can determine exactly the conditions that trigger the payouts. Investors may have to put up large deposits to ensure payouts, or they can securitize their holdings with tokens that represent real assets. None of this is particularly different from the way things are done today, but insure-bits moves everything to a real-time basis, which will automate and improve the industry significantly.
This could happen in many other industries. Stop making custom products. Just make a number of identical products, turn them into smart tokens with all their rules attached, add the regulatory code, and let the market buy and trade them at will (think: mortgages, tax liens, bonds, etc.). Anything that is currently traded in large lumps could be traded as groups of tokens that represent the smallest unit of value in the lump. This increase in granularityrequires less custom work, making markets more efficient.
I haven’t spent much time on it, but I think this general concept eliminates the need for most reinsurance as well. There will always be one-off cases for special insurance, but in general most of the basic insurance and re-insurance use cases can be met with combinations of standard insure-bits.
We’re Going to Need a Better Oracle
Which brings me to the oracle problem. People in the insurance business know that there is still no clean, decisive definition of a car accident. If smart contracts are going to pay off when triggered by various events and conditions in the real world, we’ll need oracle services to put that information onto the blockchain.
I won’t go into the details on oracles, because my friend Matt Liston has written a short piece on oracles that will get you started. Oracles will be hard to design, execute, and integrate with smart contracts, but they’ll be important. We’ll start with simple things and working toward more complex solutions. Insurance companies should be putting a lot of effort into oracle services — we’re going to need a lot of them, as each little atom of insurance will have its corresponding oracle to trigger payment unambiguously.
We’ll probably also need a better definition of time. If my car is in an accident, my personal data locker could immediately try to buy more insurance, before the market is aware of the event. Cases like this will bring in a new, connected infrastructure that ties oracles, sensors, cameras, published information, witnesses, and the Internet of Things all together using a common timeline that helps determine what happens when. This is another set of challenges we’ll need to solve before the insure-bit ecosystem is fully functional. But it sure beats the ecosystem we have today.
Summary
Yes, there are a lot of moving parts to this approach, but it’s very doable. It’s probably 95 percent more efficient than today’s insurance market, and possibly several times better for everyone except the intermediaries. It applies to plenty of other industries as well. The concept of tiny insurance tokens explodes the industry, from monolithic paper contracts to agile smart contracts that are infinitely adjustable both to buyers and sellers. A crazy idea like this could upend the insurance sector sooner than the CEOs of many large insurance companies may think.
David Siegel is a blockchain consultant, entrepreneur, lecturer, proprietor ofDecentralStation.com, and runs a blockchain bootcamp for organizations. You can learn more at www.kryptodesign.com and connect with him on LinkedIn.

The AR-15: At $700 it may cost you less than dental work. And it kills people. Lots of people.
Shouldn’t gun owners carry liability insurance?
Let’s be honest, Congress isn’t going to solve America’s gun epidemic.
This is partly because Congress is controlled by the GOP and partly because the NRA has far too much legislative influence for a group that mainly exists to take money from suckers and promote the interests of gun manufacturers over those of us who would prefer not to get shot.
This isn’t the way it should be, of course, but until we get our act together and vote for better representation, Congress is going to remain a corpulent, confluence of cowardice, impotence, and greed for the foreseeable future.
Since twenty Connecticut children were gunned down in their elementary school almost four years ago, 1,065 Americans have died in mass shootings. And Congress has done nothing.
By now, the “thoughts and prayers” posts and press releases have become boilerplate and despite continued condemnation from the president, we all know how this ends.
But when government fails to act, isn’t that a golden opportunity for the private sector?
The pro-gun lobby likes to compare guns to cars, saying that cars kill almost as many Americans as guns and we don’t ban cars. They’re right, we don’t ban cars, but we do require you to have insurance if you want to drive one—and the purpose of a car is not to kill things.
So why shouldn’t gun owners carry liability insurance?
Based on the amount of money cities are paying out for the lives taken by police (e.g., $6 million for the life of Tamir Rice in Ohio; $6.5 million for the life of Walter Scott in South Carolina), let’s use a conservative estimate and say private citizens should carry at least $4.5 million in liability insurance if you intend to own and operate a firearm.
This is probably low based on the cost of a human life, but surely insurance companies would be happy to write larger policies. And the policies, coverage, and cost would obviously vary based on the type of gun(s) you own, the purpose of use, and the risk you present.
Own a semi-automatic pistol and want to carry it with you everywhere you go? No problem, that’s 24-hour comprehensive coverage, maybe that costs you $250 a month. Work at a pawn shop and need it for business? Congratulations, you can take that as a write-off.
Own a shotgun or a hunting rifle—or both? Only use ’em once a month? Sounds like a recreational sportsman policy, maybe that’s only $25 per month, per gun.
Own an AR-15 assault rifle and want to take it with you to Walmart for no apparent reason other than to prove you’re a real American who’s super-well hung, totally digs chicks and isn’t insecure in his masculinity in any way? Cool. AR-15 insurance is only $500 a month.
But wait, that sounds really expensive.
Is it though?
Grieving for those killed in the Orlando shooting. (Photo: Joe Burbank/Orlando Sentinel/TNS)
Personally, I thought funeral services were expensive. Burying your son or daughter. Raising a child as a single parent. Caring for a loved one with a severed spinal cord for the rest of their life. To me, that sounds expensive.
But if we’re saying a gun is just a tool, it seems pretty simple. If you can’t afford to own the tool, show some personal responsibility and don’t buy one.
Meanwhile, if you really can’t live without an assault rifle, stop trying to put a price on your freedom.
Remember, if you shoot someone—jail time or not—you’re probably going to get your pants sued off.
Why should you be forced into bankruptcy when all you’re trying to do is be a good guy with a gun?
This is why insurance companies exist. Let someone else assume that risk.
If you’re afraid of the monthly premium, I’m sure there will be incentives to lower your rates. Take a two-hour gun safety course every year, buy a gun safe, buy a gun lock, don’t get arrested, bundle your coverage with home and auto policies: Discount, discount, discount, discount.
Sure, you’ll have to pay a little more if you have children. And, of course, you’ll have to pay a more if you want to roam the streets strapped like it’s 1856.
But isn’t a few bucks a month a small price to pay for your peace of mind—not to mention the inflated sense of self-esteem?
Fact is, less than 2% of the roughly 33,000 Americans killed by guns in America will be killed in a mass shooting.
This means you are far more likely to shoot—or be shot by—someone you know. Which isn’t good for you if you own a gun.
Because every twelve months in America, more than 130,000 people will be shot—most of whom won’t die. Instead, they’ll be left with physical injuries, psychological injuries, and “crippling health care bills.” Can you afford those bills?
Can you afford the bills of the bystander you mistakenly shot in the face while trying to be a hero?
Hey, your heart is in the right place. Shouldn’t your liability be limited?
I can see where elected Republicans may not immediately love this idea, after all it may require them showing up for work in some way, shape, or form.
But you know who would love it? Cops. Because it will allow them to ask for your insurance info when you bring your assault rifle with you into the neighborhood pizza joint. And when you can’t produce your insurance, there’s a fine, an impound fee, and some revenue for the city.
That could be money for schools—or trauma centers. Or both!
You know who else would like this idea, the insurance industry. And their army of lobbyists.
Right now, there are more guns in the United States than there are people. That’s millions of policies just waiting to be written.
Gun violence currently costs America $235 billion a year. This is a cottage industry waiting to happen.
Honestly, what are we waiting for?
Look, the GOP’s presumptive nominee for president has already suggested the nightclub goers in Orlando should have been armed. Which is smart, obviously, because nobody has ever made a bad decision at a nightclub at two in the morning.
And we know the NRA’s solution to each shooting is the same. More guns at schools, more guns at work, more guns in church.
And we know Republican-led state legislatures are on a spree of expanding access to guns nationwide.
All of which is to say, if we’re going to let Republicans be in charge, we’re destined to be awash in guns—so how about we let those guns pay for themselves for a change?
With the money made from all these insurance policies, we might be able to support gun violence research, fund gun safety initiatives, invest in smart-gun technology, and care for those seriously injured by guns.
In fact, we may find out that this is so lucrative it could help us afford single payer health care.
But, hey, one problem at a time, right?
If you enjoyed this piece, please recommend it & send it to your friend at State Farm.
Afterward, you can follow me on Twitter @jkarsh or on instagram @_jkarsh.

Insert paperwork here
Getting title insurance out of the junk drawer
ALTA Innovation Boot Camp — Part I: The roadblocks
I gave a talk at American Land Title Association’s (ALTA) Innovation Boot Camp event in Denver and wanted to summarize it here. This is Part I, summarizing the problems. I’ll get Part II out next week.
A big thank you to Jeff Bernheisel from WFG for recommending me to the event organizers. I prefer events like this one when I do speak. Thank you.
To everyone who attended the event and listened patiently as I unpacked this talk: thank you. Please come visit Bend soon. Email me if you want a copy of the slide deck: greg@bendstation.com
Overcoming Innovation Roadblocks
I didn’t come up with this title myself, but I did form my thesis around it.
Innovation
noun
- the application of better solutions that meet new requirements, unarticulated needs, or existing market needs
Roadblock
noun
- an action, condition, etc., that obstructs progress toward an objective
The state of the union in the title industry
After doing some research and talking it over with Wayne Stanley at ALTA and Adam Brown of First American Title, (thank you both!) the roadblocks facing the title industry started to become very clear to me.
1. The story the industry is telling us about itself is different from the way we all experience it
This claim was taken straight from a major title company’s website:
The title industry is an important part of every American’s life. It may seem like a grandiose claim, but the work we do benefits not only each individual policyholder, but the nation as a whole.
Don’t get me wrong, I love the intention behind this statement. But I have never heard title insurance framed in this way, much less thought about it from this perspective myself. I can’t imagine actually writing this copy and taking myself seriously either. One might argue their claim is grandiose, and I would not disagree. The positioning problem for title companies is complex, especially when title orders are usually fulfilled as described in point #2. The claim gets even more contrived as one realizes where those title documents mostly end up; in the junk drawer of the home office.
What’s most frustrating about this problem is that it’s mostly self-inflicted. Title insurance is a critical piece of the real estate transaction (an even bigger piece of it if the same company is also providing escrow services). Whoever came up with this American Dream narrative probably asked the industry to define what it stands for…instead of asking its customers.
self-awareness is the first step
2. There is not a clear B2C strategy, and B2B marketing has been reduced to leaving swag around brokerage offices
B2C
Talking about title insurance can get nuanced very quickly from the perspective of a real estate broker, so I’ll tread lightly here. It can get confusing figuring out who really selects a title or escrow company. Most would agree that sellers (via their brokers) usually choose a preferred title company on their listings. In fact, it’s a data field in my MLS, among others. And while this practice isn’t nefarious by itself, it definitely doesn’t position the buyer to be in control of this at the start of negotiations even though a policy gets issued on their behalf.
From REALTOR Magazine:
It’s not unusual for a listing agent to have a favorite closing agent and want the buyer to close the transaction using that agent, along with the agent’s title insurance and settlement services. What many practitioners don’t realize, however, is that Section 9 of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA) prohibits sellers from conditioning the home sale on the use of a specific title insurance company, and in fact violators can be subject to penalties, with the most -typical being a fine of up to 3 times the amount of the title insurance fee.
All that to point out the very obvious roadblock that title company’s have been facing for decades. If buyers really aren’t bound to the seller’s preferred title company of choice — how might title position their product to buyers in a way that made it matter who actually issues the policy? Answering this question is critical if title insurance providers are going to legitimately make claims like the one quoted in point #1.
B2B
Since most title companies are not deploying meaningful B2C marketing campaigns (at least not in a way that attracts homebuyers before they actually have a need for their services) the industry primarily focuses on B2B tactics and brand marketing. But brand marketing in this respect usually means passing out collateral or a gift with a logo on it more than it means demonstrating how the industry is “protecting the American Dream.”
The NAR on RESPA:
RESPA prohibits a real estate broker or agent from receiving a “thing of value” for referring business to a settlement service provider, or SSP, such as a mortgage banker, mortgage broker, title company, or title agent. RESPA also prohibits SSPs from splitting fees received for settlement services, unless the fee is for a service actually performed.
Title companies and other service providers have to find better ways to break out of the latest RESPA regulations, which prevent kickbacks and most marketing service agreements (MSA’s) which is essentially a fancy way to say “buying the business.” And pens, notepads, and flyers left around brokerage offices won’t cut it. (They’ll just end up in the recycling bin tbh)
Moving the industry forward
Don’t worry — it’s not all doom and gloom. The title industry has a tremendous opportunity to establish a unified marketing message that resonates with consumers and there are various opportunities to create products and experiences that enhance its B2B relationships.
More in Part II…

I’m Greg Fischer, principal broker in charge of growth operations at Fred Real Estate Group in Bend, Oregon. Find out more about what I’m working on at bendgrowth.com
I also work with early stage real estate startups. I guess I’m speaking at events too. Find me on LinkedIn and AngelList

Under Obamacare, Millions Of Americans Will Pay Less Than $100 Per Month For Health Insurance

About 6.4 million Americans will be able to purchase insurance for less than $100 each month on Obamacare’s new state-level marketplaces, according to a new report from the Department of Health and Human Services. That’s because those people will be eligible for federal subsidies that will reduce the price of purchasing a plan under the health reform law.
The Obama administration calculated the expected premiums for people buying “silver” plans, which are the second-cheapest option on the new insurance marketplaces. Even though not every marketplace has announced its premium rates yet, researchers were still able to estimate those payments based on the health law’s rule for determining subsidies.
Americans who make up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level — which works out to be $94,200 for a family of four — are eligible for subsidies that ensure they’ll only pay a certain percentage of their income for a health plan. Using census data on Americans’ income levels, researchers were able to extrapolate how many of them would be paying less than $100 for monthly premiums for silver plans.
The new HHS report aligns with previous research that has found that many Americans won’t be covering the full cost of premiums for individual plans on Obamacare’s marketplaces. The Kaiser Family Foundation estimates that 48 percent of the Americans who need to buy insurance on the marketplaces will receive federal subsidies to help them afford it. That number rises even more for young Americans between the ages of 18 to 34 years old, who comprise the largest share of any age group to benefit from this cost-saving provision.
One of the persistent criticisms of the health reform law is that it will dramatically hike Americans’ premiums. But many of the reports about potential “rate shock” don’t take into account the effect of the federal subsidies. It’s difficult to predict how Obamacare will impact specific premiums in every state, but it is important to remember that the plans being created under the health law are brand new. They won’t necessarily be comparable to the insurance that Americans currently have, because Obamacare’s marketplaces will require each plan to meet a set of requirements to ensure they provide adequate coverage.
In addition to subsidized plans on the marketplaces, other Americans will end up paying less than $100 for their insurance because they will qualify for Medicaid under their state’s expanded program. Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion is optional, and the HHS report calculated the effect it will have in the 25 states that have so far indicated they will accept it. In that half of the country, about 12.4 million uninsured Americans will pay less than $100 each month — and many of them will pay nothing at all — to participate in the public health insurance program.
Between federal subsidies and increased Medicaid enrollment, more than half of the Americans who are currently uninsured won’t need to pay more than $100 per month to begin accessing health coverage under Obamacare, according to HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius.

Does Insurance Face A Credibility Crisis?
A couple of months ago, one of my friends took a tumble on his bicycle. He was going 35mph, and as luck would have it, it was the one time he wasn’t wearing a helmet. It was ugly. Bruises, abrasions, a concussion, knee pain, all the stuff you would expect to happen when you’re thrown into the pavement at full speed. Actually quite a bit less, because he landed well and he’s all of 19 years old. This sort of thing causes a lot less damage when you’re younger.
After the accident, what happened was exactly what you’d expect: he was taken to the hospital. And here’s where it gets weird. You see, when in pain, suffering from a concussion, and in no position at all to make a major financial decision, the hospital — in the process of diagnosing and treating his injuries — performed diagnostic services that weren’t considered medically necessary by his insurance company.
When my friend checked into the hospital (remember, in pain and suffering from a head injury) he actually signed a 7-page legal contract in which he agreed to pay for anything the insurance wouldn’t. And this is how my friend just ended up with a massive hospital bill. The hospital apparently performed multiple X-rays and the insurance company doesn’t think this was necessary, so they won’t pay. And who is left holding the bag? My friend. Who, I’ll point out, is a 19 year old student, not a doctor, and who had no idea how many X-rays were necessary. “Pay up or we’ll send it to collections,” said the hospital, so next quarter’s tuition money has gone to the hospital instead of the university. My young friend isn’t entirely sure what to do next.
This isn’t unique. A woman who was tackle-hugged by her nephew was treated for a broken wrist when it went wrong. $127,000 later, her pass-the-buck health insurance company wouldn’t pay the bill. They asked her to file a homeowners’ claim. “Fine,” said the homeowners’ insurance company, “but you have to sue your 12 year old nephew first.” They were probably hoping she’d refuse so they wouldn’t have to pay. Instead, she did, and thus became the latest outrage-of-the-day on social media.
However you look at this, it’s broken. No major industrialized country operates their healthcare market this way. My young friend has learned a harsh lesson: even if you have insurance, you’re not necessary covered. In the future, he plans to refuse emergency medical care. There’s a gap between what hospitals and doctors think is necessary and what insurance will pay for, healthcare consumers are caught in the middle, and my friend just cannot take the risk. Quite rationally, the financial risk of treatment (and he’s insured, mind you) exceeds the financial risk of refusing treatment, at least where spills off a bicycle at 35mph are concerned. And that is completely fucking insane.
Another friend recently suffered the loss of personal property when a California wildfire burned the house she is living in. What wasn’t burned by fire was soaked by water when firefighters responded. However, she is still awaiting payment of her claim. This is pending the outcome of an investigation into the origin of the wildfire. If it’s determined that negligence or arson started the fire (which spread from miles away), her claim will not be paid. She’ll have to pursue a tort action herself, if the perpetrator can be found, and recover whatever she can. This may not be much, if anything. The last serial arsonist in the area was a homeless man who has spent most of his life in and out of mental institutions. The last accidental wildfire was set by a group of teenagers. In the event that her insurance doesn’t pay out, my friend will have to hope for a billionaire perpetrator instead. This is crazy.
These are symptoms of a larger cancer that is attacking the insurance industry as a whole: the failure to credibly pay claims that consumers rationally expect to be paid. From auto to fire to renter’s to medical insurance, it’s an epic battle for many consumers to get claims paid. The mental model has, for many consumers, shifted to an assumption that insurance doesn’t pay so there’s no point in carrying it. And this is entirely rational. After all, fire insurance doesn’t pay out for all fires, medical insurance doesn’t pay all hospital bills, and auto insurance doesn’t pay out for all crashes. Some insurance companies seem to default to refusing claims while raising rates anyway. Given the particular lack of credibility in the auto insurance market, an increasing number of auto claims are settled “off the books” between private parties. And given that insurance has become less reliable, it’s no real surprise that younger people carry less of it. Today, a record low percentage of Americans carry life insurance coverage, and the percentage of American auto insurance consumers either uninsured or carrying state minimum coverage is at an all-time high. If insurance won’t pay out anyway, why bother carrying any more than the minimum amount required by law?
Yes, tort abuse and claims fraud are a huge problem. I’m not talking about those. I’m talking about situations that policyholders reasonably expect should be covered, and — for reasons that can only be described as disingenuous— aren’t. This may boost quarterly profits, but detracts from the credibility of the insurance industry as a whole, and may explain why this is an increasingly moribund sector. The industry has successfully fought regulation to the point where it’s now suffering a credibility crisis largely of its own making.
Neutering regulators may ultimately prove to be a Pyrrhic victory, as evidenced by sluggish sales and growth. If the insurance industry wants to thrive, it’s time for the pendulum to shift back toward consumers. Insurers need to pay claims when policyholders expect it. They need to have their policyholders’ backs again. After all, that’s why they’re in business.
About the author: I am the founder of Cuddli, a company dedicated to creating joy in people’s lives every day. I’m interested in technology that helps keep people and their data safe without slowing business down. Feel free to reach out if I can help you.

Hillary Clinton says a record 90% of Americans have health insurance today
At the second presidential debate, Clinton correctly claimed that health insurance coverage in the United State is at 90 percent. True.
By Louis Jacobson, PolitiFact senior correspondent
During the second presidential debate in St. Louis, a member of the audience asked a question about the shortcomings of Obamacare, as the Affordable Care Act — President Barack Obama’s signature health care law — is sometimes called.
In her answer, Hillary Clinton defended the law, citing its provisions to end barriers to obtaining insurance for those who have preexisting conditions, and ending lifetime limits on coverage.
“If we repeal it, as Donald has proposed, and start over again, all of those benefits I just mentioned are lost to everybody — not just people who get their health insurance on the exchange,” she said. “And then we would have to start all over again.”
She went on to say that the practical consequences of the law have been strong. “Now we’re at 90 percent health insurance coverage,” she said. “That’s the highest we’ve ever been in our country.”
Is she correct? Yes.
The most widely cited data comes from the U.S. Census Bureau, which tabulates statistics annually on what percentage of Americans are covered by health insurance. The most recent report came out in September 2016, covering the year 2015.
The Census Bureau found that 90.9 percent of Americans had some type of health coverage, whether it was provided by their employer, purchased independently or through a government program such as Medicare or Medicaid. The remainder — 9.1 percent of Americans — were uninsured.
Here’s the key table from the report:

That was an improvement over the 89.6 percent in 2014, 86.7 percent in 2013, 84.6 percent in 2012, 84.3 percent in 2011, and 83.7 percent in 2010 — the year the Affordable Care Act was passed, although the law didn’t start having a major impact for another few years.
Meanwhile, between 1999 and 2009, the insured rate bounced from a low of 83.9 percent to a high of 86.9 percent, the furthest back the Census Bureau offers the statistic online. And at the time the 2015 data was released, it was framed as a record high for insurance coverage.
Looking at it the opposite way, the uninsured rate fell from 16.3 percent in 2010 to 9.1 percent in 2015 — a decline of nearly half over five years.
Our ruling
Clinton said, “Right now we are at 90 percent health insurance covered. That’s the highest we’ve ever been in our country.”
According to Census Bureau data, that’s correct; it was just shy of 91 percent in 2015, the most recent year for which data is available. We rate the statement True.
SOURCES
Hillary Clinton, remarks in the second presidential debate in St. Louis, Oct. 9, 2016
U.S. Census Bureau, “Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2015,” September 2016
U.S. Census Bureau, “HIB-2. Health Insurance Coverage Status and Type of Coverage All Persons by Age and Sex: 1999 to 2012,” accessed Oct. 9, 2016

Reports show that insurance company profits are way up: https://theintercept.com/2016/08/27/obamacares-faltering-for-one-simple-reason-profit/ and https://www.consumeraffairs.com/news/health-insurance-industry-rakes-in-billions-while-blaming-obamacare-for-losses-110116.html. Here’s a breakdown of the costs that insurers have that show much money is being spent on non-care activities: http://www.iii.org/fact-statistic/industry-overview
Can you share an actual source from the IRS?

Health Insurance Companies Under Obamacare — Why the Complaints?
I’ve been seeing the headlines since this past April:
United Healthcare to exit most Obamacare Exchanges
Anthem could pull out of Obamacare
Cigna joins health insurance industry pullback from Obamacare
I don’t pretend to understand the health insurance industry and all its’ intricacies. As a consumer, my mind is repeatedly blown at how inefficient things are, but I won’t pretend to have a clue how to solve the mess.
The thing I simply cannot wrap my head around — insurance companies complaining about Obamacare hurting them. Everything I read makes it seem like large insurers are doing us all a favor by participating in the exchanges, and that they’re somehow getting killed. As a consumer, I’m lost, but as an investor, my natural reflex is to pull up a few charts.




You do not need IBM Watson to see how insanely identically the perforance of the four big insurers has been under Obama. In an almost perfectly synchronized fashion, they all were middling upwards, took a slight hit in the Crisis, and then in lock-step have all shot up and to the right.
I plan on researching this further, but in the meantime — is there some major regulatory change from George W. Bush that unleashed this trend independent of Obamacare? How are we supposed to take the complaints of CEOs who make it seem like Obamacare has been a pox on their houses, while their company stocks have taken on Apple-like climbs?
Any advice or information on this is much appreciated as I’m genuinely confused.

How real are autonomous cars? Real enough to be ‘risk factors’ for insurance companies.
A WSJ piece that underscores how auto autos are going to disrupt all industries touching automobiles:
Cincinnati Financial Corp. , an Ohio-based insurer generating nearly a quarter of its premiums from commercial and consumer auto policies, warned in the annual report it filed Friday that its forecasts could be flawed because of, among other things, “Disruption of the insurance market caused by technology innovations such as driverless cars that could decrease consumer demand for insurance products.”
Mercury General Corp. , an auto insurer issuing most of its coverage in California, said in its annual report that “the advent of driverless cars and usage-based insurance could materially alter the way that automobile insurance is marketed, priced, and underwritten.”
Travelers Cos., one of the largest U.S. property-casualty insurers, said the technology has the potential to transform consumer demand, the way policies are priced, and the all-important patterns of crash frequency and severity that insurers use to predict their risks.
Insurers aren’t the only companies fretting. LKQ Corp. , a Chicago auto-parts maker, cited risks from the safety technologies that many see as leading the way to driverless cars. “If the number of vehicles involved in accidents declines or the number of cars being repaired declines, our business could suffer,” reads a heading in the annual report LKQ filed on Monday.

Your Definitive Guide to Pet Sitting Insurance
Time To Pet is not an insurance agent and does not sell insurance products. This article is meant as a guide to help Pet Sitters and Dog Walkers understand Pet Sitting Insurance and to direct them to where they can find additional information. Time To Pet does not endorse any Pet Insurance company or product.

Starting a pet sitting or dog walking business is a risky venture. In fact — starting any type of business involves a level of risk. You are risking your time, your energy and your finances. While you may not be investing a million dollars — you are still making an investment. The goal of your business is to provide a return on that investment but occasionally — the return is not what you expected — hence the risk!
Now Pet Sitting Insurance fits into this puzzle by mitigating your risk for particular actions and/or occurrences by transferring the risk to an Insurance Carrier who then charges you a fee. Your Insurance Carrier pools the risk of many clients to make the payments more affordable for their customers.
Time To Pet highly recommends that pet sitters and dog walkers carry some form of Pet Sitting Insurance to help mitigate their risk. Pet Sitting Insurance can give you financial protection if an accident occurs and having Insurance can also provide you, your staff members and your clients peace of mind. Think of it this way — if you were hiring a contractor to build your house and narrowed it down to two but one had insurance and one didn’t — who would you pick?
While the actual items included in a Pet Sitting Insurance Policy can vary from Carrier to Carrier — it is important to look for two key items.
General Liability
General Liability protects your business from things like bodily injury, personal injury or property damage caused by your business’ operations. While General Liability can be comprehensive — it does not protect your business from all liability. However, General Liability is the core of Pet Sitting Insurance. Some example of what General Liability may cover you from could be if you were walking a dog and the dog in your care bit someone who happened to be walking past you. Another example could be if you forgot to put the dog in your care in the spare bedroom and the dog ate the new leather couch in the living room after you had left. General Liability protects pet sitters and dog walkers against third party claims (the key is third party — someone besides you) caused by you or your staff member’s negligence.
Bonding
You may have heard professionals mention that they are “Insured and Bonded”. The Insured part represents being covered by an Insurance Policy. The bonding part is quite different. While technically not insurance, being “Bonded” protects your business from theft or mysterious disappearance of your client’s personal property. While a client’s watch going missing while their pets were under your care is a nightmare scenario — Bonding can help protect your business from that situation.
There are several providers who offer Pet Sitting Insurance in the United States but the four major providers are:
Pet Sitters Associates — Providing coverage since 1998. Pet Sitters Associates offers lots of options including a Business Listing service
Business Insurers of the Carolinas — Providing coverage since 1992. Must be a member of NAPPS or PSI.
Kennel Pro — Offering three different packages.
Pet Care Insurance — Offers products for many different pet care professionals.
There are many other types of insurance outside of the scope of Pet Sitting Software that you may want to consider. Those can include:
Worker’s Compensation — Can provide coverage for your staff members for injuries occurring on the job
Commercial Auto Insurance — Can protect you and your team when dealing with automobile incidents
Umbrella Policies — To help fill in any gaps in your insurance coverage
As a reminder — Time To Pet is not involved in the insurance field. We provide Pet Sitting Software and have created this guide to help pet sitters and dog walkers better understand Pet Sitting Insurance and to direct them to where they can find additional information. Time To Pet does not endorse any Pet Insurance company or product.

Why private health insurance coverage in Canada needs a review

By John Have and Robert L. Brown
Last week, the media carried a story about a nine-year-old boy in New Brunswick who was denied private health coverage because of his weight (at 5 foot 2 inches and 135 pounds). His family were shocked — as were many reading the story — that a child could be denied private health coverage in Canada. In fact, it’s not only possible — and entirely legal — it may be a sign of things to come.
The boy’s father had been laid off work in January and, as a result, the Doiron family lost their extended health insurance provided by his employer. So they wanted to buy private coverage to ‘top up’ what is not covered by Canada’s publicly funded health system.
Canadians tend to think that we have completely publicly funded healthcare. While this is true for medically-necessary care, such as hospital, diagnostic and physician services, most Canadians must fund their dental, vision and pharmaceutical drug costs privately, along with other healthcare services, such as chiropractic or physiotherapy, not deemed ‘essential’ under the Canada Health Act.
Canadians must insure or pay out-of-pocket a whopping 30 percent of health costs with only around 70 percent covered by our publicly funded health system.
Private healthcare costs in Canada have grown dramatically over the last 40 years. Adjusting for population growth and inflation, private healthcare costs have increased by over 220 percent on average since 1975 — or around $1,800 per person. That’s no small figure for most Canadian families.
What’s driving up the cost? Some of this increase is due to overall aging of the population but most is due to increased costs for health services as well as expanded use and availability of services. Drug costs over the years have increased dramatically, and may continue to do so with the emerging use of personalized medicine and drugs for rare conditions.
In fact, Canada is one of few countries in the world with a universal health system that doesn’t include prescription drug coverage as a medically-necessary benefit. Some health policy experts have been calling on the federal government to increase publicly funded health coverage by establishing a national pharmacare program. This is currently being discussed at both federal and provincial levels.
In the meantime, many Canadian rely on private insurance to help with the 30 percent of health needs not covered by our public health system.
For many, the private healthcare component is provided through group insurance at their place of work. Families lose this coverage if laid off — or don’t have it in the first place if they work on contract or part-time.
Some insurers do offer limited coverage to those who recently lost their jobs (within the last 60 days) without having to provide medical evidence; however, maximum annual benefits are typically very limited compared to their previous plans.
For those unemployed, under-employed or self-employed, purchasing individual private health plans for their families is the only option. But to be eligible for individual coverage, medical evidence of good health must be provided to the insurer, and anyone in the family with a pre-existing medical condition may be offered only limited coverage or even denied coverage completely.
The alternative is for Canadians to pay out-of-pocket for private health expenses or forego some health services altogether because they can’t afford them.
So what about all those individuals and families across Canada who want private insurance coverage and can’t get it — or can’t afford it? This is a question our provincial and federal governments need to address.
The loss of healthcare coverage through loss of job may actually have a simple insurance solution.
Existing group life insurance regulations and guidelines could offer a path forward. In stark contrast to group health insurance, when someone is laid off work, group life contracts in Canada must allow the employee to convert their group life insurance to individual life insurance plans up to a maximum of $200,000 (for those under age 65).
The key component? They do not have to provide any evidence of insurability. In other words, they are guaranteed the possibility of purchasing a reasonably-priced life insurance plan with without having to pass any health tests to get it.
Isn’t it time to use the group life insurance conversion model for group health insurance when someone in Canada is laid off? This would allow families access to adequate private health coverage without punishing their finances or making them go without.
This simple solution won’t address all the concerns around private health costs in Canada, but it is something governments and insurers could work together to implement without too much difficulty. It would’ve helped the Doiron family and the many others like them.
John Have, Fellow, Canadian Institute of Actuaries; President, Have Associates.
Robert L. Brown is an expert advisor with EvidenceNetwork.ca and a Fellow with the Canadian Institute of Actuaries. He was Professor of Actuarial Science at the University of Waterloo for 39 years and a past president of the Canadian Institute of Actuaries.

How the Insurance Industry Can Make Our Roads Safer
By Karla Gonzalez Carvajal and Nathalie Louat
Road crashes are a global health and development challenge with significant human and economic costs, especially in developing countries. The leading cause of death among people aged 15–29, road crashes kill 1.25 million people every year and injure another 50 million — more deaths than from malaria or tuberculosis. In low and middle-income countries, this is estimated to reduce GDP by 3 to 5%. The United Nations recognized the severity of this challenge by adopting specific road safety targets in the Sustainable Development Goals: to halve the number of global deaths and injuries from road crashes by 2020.
This ambitious target can only be achieved through a concerted effort that involves all major stakeholders: national and local governments, multilateral development banks, bilateral donors, civil society, and the private sector. The latter, a key stakeholder in this agenda, can contribute the knowledge, resources, and innovations that are required to accelerate progress and decisively change existing trends.
The insurance industry is also a key part of this coalition. Already playing an important, if somewhat hidden, role in the road safety agenda, the industry insures almost 1 billion vehicles globally, helping to reduce the costs of road crashes to society and the economy.
Improvements in road safety benefit the public as well as the insurance industry. Broad-based insurance coverage makes sure that health and property costs for victims of road crashes are protected, but it also benefits insurance companies by expanding their market. In the same vein, reducing the number or severity of crashes benefits all of us, while it also reduces the volume of claims to insurance firms.
Photo credit: Carlos Felipe Pardo
In fact a huge motivator to create good road safety practices lies in the sense of personal responsibility. A driver who wants to achieve a safe record is far more likely to avoid accidents than a driver who has no care for safety. If insurance is both well designed and implemented, it can have an enormous impact for improving road safety.
Given this strong alignment, there is an opportunity for the insurance industry to take a leadership role in furthering the cause of safer roads. Specifically, we believe there are five areas where insurance firms can make a significant contribution:
Embed road safety in insurance products and services, such as bonus-penalty mechanisms for insurance. Risk-based pricing is a powerful tool in the promotion of personal responsibility, as it links the causing of an accident to the economics of paying for those consequences, which in turn gradually lead to safer driving and behavior change.
Promote new technologies that inform road users about driving behavior, through apps and other tools. Linked with insurance policies and risk-based pricing, this can be a game-changer.
Provide shared, data-driven knowledge and research to contribute to a better understanding of the causes of road crashes and of safe road behavior.
Invest in raising public awareness of risk factors for road users (speeding, alcohol use, absence of seatbelts, seasonality), with a focus on vulnerable road users such as children, motorbikes and non-motorized vehicles.
Partner with public authorities and civil society, sharing expertise and developing innovative ways to develop and finance road safety policies and programs.
Many of these contributions are already demonstrating success in specific countries and regions. But what will it take to scale-up successful solutions and roll them out on a large scale in lower and middle-income countries, where the toll of road crashes is the highest? We believe it requires a joint commitment to a public-private partnership process that combines the development of a conducive enabling environment, the building of strong public institutions and programs, and a local private sector that has the capital and knowledge to successfully embed road safety in insurance products.
In this regard it is encouraging to see the pioneering work and commitment of a growing number of insurance companies. During the recent 2nd Global High Level Conference on Road Safety in Brasilia, for example, at a panel discussion convened by the IFC, the World Bank and AXA, four international insurance firms pledged to reinforce their engagements in road safety, in partnership with public authorities and civil society. This is a step in the right direction, and we need more of these actions and commitments.
Improving road safety is a complex process involving different elements of the economy and society. It is imperative that clear responsibility and authority are assigned to the various entities involved to ensure that all important aspects are adequately covered. It is equally important to have a designated body with clear responsibility for coordination to ensure coherent programs and the effective use of resources for the implementation of road safety measures.
Today, there is a gap between the governments, insurers and the end users. We need to come together to achieve greater synergy between the efforts of these stakeholders to further reduce costly road crashes. Potential changes to legal frameworks, and the implementation of a risk-based approach tariff should be based on reliable statistics, establishing a guarantee fund, a transparent claims management procedure and strong implementation and enforcement.
At the World Bank and IFC, and through our Global Road Safety Facility, we can play the role of catalyst to such efforts and partnerships. Bringing stakeholders around the table, supporting governments, NGOs and private enterprises to develop a conducive environment and implement best practices, in a manner that combines safer roads with business success for the benefit of all, but particularly the poorest.
The road safety challenge needs decisive and concrete contributions of all relevant public and private stakeholders. We look forward to adding more partners to these much needed efforts.
Karla Carvajal is a specialist in the subject of negotiation and alternative dispute resolution. She obtained her MBA with an emphasis on Marketing at the University of San Diego in California and holds a degree in Law from the University of Costa Rica. She is currently Transport Sector Manager for South Asia at the World Bank.
Nathalie Louat is Senior Manager in IFC’s Financial Institutions Group in charge globally of Insurance, Innovation, Capital Markets, and the Distressed Assets Recovery Program, based in Washington.
She was previously a Senior Manager for East Asia and the Pacific Portfolio Operations in the Financial Institutions Group, based in Hong Kong. From 2010 until 2014, Nathalie was supporting IFC’s clients in the financial sector in East Asia Pacific. She managed a USD 3bn portfolio with exposure to 90 clients and 150 projects located from Mongolia to the Pacific Islands.
This post originally appeared on Transport for Development blog.

5 Ways Big Data is Making a Splash in the Insurance Industry

There’s conflicting opinions on when the term Big Data really came onto the scene, but it is undeniable that its notoriety has skyrocketed in the past few years. Big Data has become the hot topic buzzword around the internet, as is made obvious in the Google Trends graph below.
One by one as analytics solutions became more accessible, industries found different ways to leverage the Big Data Revolution to their best advantage in their field. Virtually every industry, from manufacturing and retail to healthcare and education, has found a use for the ever-growing labyrinth of data resources.
The Insurance Industry is no exception in the Big Data Revolution. The Ernst and Young 2015 Global Insurance Outlook claims “technology” is the one word that encompasses the Insurance industry right now. The report states, “Insurers across all regions are capitalizing on data analytics, cloud computing, and modeling techniques to sharpen their market segmentation strategies, reduce claims fraud and strengthen underwriting and risk management.”

Although there are many ways that Insurers are utilizing Big Data and data analytics to benefit their bottom line, there are 5 areas being impacted the most.
1. Data for streamlined underwriting
Insurance underwriters are faced with the daily challenge of providing policy recommendations that are both fair to the consumer, as well as protect the best interest of the insurance company. Big Data is changing the future for underwriters as they must adapt to their new roles as data analysts as well as underwriters.
A study by Marketforce, the Chartered Insurance Institute (CII) and the Chartered Institute of Loss Adjusters in conjunction with Ordnance found that most underwriters are taking the evolution of their industry in stride. The study revealed that 9 out of 10 underwriters see the potential in access to real-time claims data to improve pricing accuracy. Real-time data mining is streamlining the underwriting process by providing accurate, current insights that could have taken days to locate and consolidate. With access to quality data sources, underwriters are able to complete processes in less time and with better accuracy. Real-time data facilitates streamlined processes leading to higher placement rates and a much faster underwriting cycle.

2. Data for Personalized Policies
Access to multichannel data sources gives underwriters the ability to base premium costs and policy parameters on a more realistic view of risk as opposed to generalized assumptions based on factors such as location and age. Consequently, this integration of highly granular and individualized characteristics into the underwriting cycle is driving a more personalized consumer experience. Customers who feel they are receiving fair treatment instead of at the mercy of generalizations receive a more positive experience and are more inclined to remain loyal clients.
3. Identifying Customers at Risk of Cancellation
Leveraging Big Data insights is well known for its ability to provide quality prospects for businesses, but another lesser known feature is its ability to shed light on low quality prospects or frustrated clients. Advanced analytics tools allow insurers to target individuals who are apt to be a long term loyal customer, and also to weed out individuals who are a high risk of canceling coverage. Predictive analytics is used to track and reveal signal behaviors that indicate an impending cancellation. This allows insurance agents to reach out to unhappy consumers before their final decision has been made, and tailor opportunities to encourage them to stay with the company.
4. Identifying Risk of Fraud
Fraudulent claims are an unfortunately common occurrence afflicting the insurance industry. The Coalition of Insurance Fraud estimates that nearly $80 billion in fraudulent claims are made annually in the United States. This staggering statistic has led to heightened awareness and the use of predictive data analytics to detect applicants with a higher propensity to commit fraud. Additionally, after a claim has been made Insurers can use data mining to track digital and social channels for evidence of fraudulent behavior.
5. Customer Relationship Management
Data has become an indispensable tool for Insurers to implement positive consumer relationships and intuitive acquisition strategies. Delivering exceptional customer experiences through a comprehensive customer profile provides better understanding of customers’ preferences, lifestyles, and other key characteristics, which allow insurers to deliver highly relevant and personalized offers. By investing in Data Integration and Quality solutions, insurers can build a fully integrated marketing database that pulls data from various locations to improve customer intelligence and ensure a positive experience. Concerning acquisition, insurers use DaaS to monitor behavior in real-time to target high quality prospects.
One example is a national life insurance company who knows that 41% of life insurance purchases are motivated by life stage events. Armed with this knowledge, they used DaaS to examine potential data sources such as baby shower registries (arrival of a new child), wedding registries (inclination of customers to plan ahead for spouse’ sake), or various social signals that indicate retirement or improved financial state that places individuals in a primed mental state to receive advertisements on life insurance. Tragedies can also influence insurance purchases. The death of a loved one, a natural disaster, or nearby crime all encourage an interest in planning for the future.
Big Data is impacting all industries in different ways, but it’s certain that the insurance industry is one of the leading innovators of DaaS implementation. As industry leaders continue to invest in Big Data solutions it will soon become as ingrained into the insurance industry’s processes as underwriting itself.
To learn how insurers can use big data to acquire in-market prospects, watch this free on-demand webinar.

Your Employer Insurance is Not Your Only Option
Actually, it might be a bad option. Sounds weird right? I mean, your boss is nice enough to offer health insurance, but more often than not, we are seeing it might actually cause more damage than good for you in the long run.
We all have different needs when it comes to health insurance. The health care industry has done an excellent job at making it as confusing and frustrating as possible. That means when it’s time to decide on what we actually need, we tend to not want to be bothered by it, and just take whatever we get, and well, we hope for the best. But we’re seeing that employers are not offered the best plans to choose from to start with, or cannot afford to buy them for their employees. The result is many employees receive health insurance that does not cover what they need, or are paying more for their employer insurance than if they would have just bought it themselves.
So you have choices. Yes. Here’s what you should be doing to make sure your employer insurance is the right plan for you:
Ask what the deductible is on your plan. The deductible is the amount you have to pay first out of your own pocket before the health insurer starts to pay for your expenses. The thing to remember is that once you pay your deductible that doesn’t mean the health insurer will pay for everything. It means they will start to pay for only the things they have said are “covered”. Everything else you still pay for, and sometimes, they might add what’s called co-insurance to your expenses.
Ask what the co-insurance is, and specifically, ask what the co-insurance is on hospitalization. Here’s another place they try to trick you, and we’ve seen hospitalization coverage get trimmed down in employer plans. So you’ve paid your deductible, you’re all good, so you think, then you end up in a minor accident that might need a day or two of hospitalization. Wait. Did you know you had a 30% co-insurance for your hospital stay? So if your hospital stay is $40k, you’re out another $12k for that quick trip to the hospital.
If you take meds, specifically ask to see their formulary list for the plan you are thinking about joining. This is the list of medications that the plan will cover. You want to make sure your meds are on that list so you don’t pay the full price for the medication.
If you have doctors you love, or must see, call them and ask if they are part of your plan’s network. Wait call my doctor? Yes, call your doctor, do not call your health plan. Why? Unless you have Kaiser Permanente, or a small health plan, we’ve found that they don’t know. At least the people answering the phones don’t know. You might also get passed around a lot, so the easiest way to find out is to call your doctor. The doctor knows exactly who pays him and who doesn’t. Very rarely is there any grey in that area.
Compare your other options, but do it based on your total yearly costs, not just your monthly premium. You want to add everything up to see what the true costs will be for you. Recently at impact health, we did an analysis of costs for a film director. He had what seemed like an awesome employer plan through the. However once we added everything up, we saw that he was paying an additional $2200 per month on top of his premium on things his employer plan did not cover. When we suggested a plan that had a monthly premium of $1000 above his employer plans cost, he almost passed out. After seeing that switching health insurance plans would save him $1200 month (or $14,400 in a year), he realized that solely focusing on that monthly premium doesn’t tell us the whole story.
You are one of the lucky few that can choose between your employer plan, an exchange plan, or a private plan that is sold directly from the health insurer. Exchange plans have certain expenses they all must cover, however, tend to have less doctor choices. Private plans vary, and many times tend to be lower cost than your employer plan, and cover more of what you need. The trick is to outsmart your health insurer by knowing what to look for before paying thousands of dollars for something that won’t work for you.

Insurance…..
So far, I’ve been able to turn around two of the biggest negative circumstances in my life just from remembering to save up. After partnering with H&R Block and taking the Budget Challenge, I’ve been reminded of the importance of saving money for my emergency fund and another hard core, real life reason: why having that insurance is a very necessary thing.
Before, having car insurance and paying the extra money was hard for me to come to terms with. Why would I need to pay a large premium for something that probably isn’t going to happen, like a crazy $10,000 car accident? It felt like I was wasting money, especially with the size of my insurance, after being in three fender benders (my driving has gotten better since, I promise)…
My insurance for a 19-year-old driver with a few accidents on my record is, well, not low unfortunately.
I kept asking myself, why must I pay this premium for what feels like nothing? Because LIFE happens, and we never know what insane things, good or bad, may strike our lives next. The H&R Block Budget Challenge is teaching me that from the realistic perspective of having to deal with these emergencies.
Seeing what my bill WOULD HAVE been if I didn’t have insurance when I got into a simulated car accident in the Budget Challenge, made me really glad I had insurance. Getting into car accidents like that are costly, and you may have to pay tens of thousands of dollars for repairs. It can be heart wrenching, especially if you have to dig into hard earned savings to pay for it. It’s better to make sure you’ll be covered from all ends instead of risking it, because it could cost you a chunk of your savings OR even cause you to spiral into debt, which is what we’re trying to avoid by learning from the Budget Challenge.
There are several things to consider when getting insurance but to keep it lean, here’s what you’ll be most concerned with when purchasing any kind of insurance… Auto, Health, Home, Life etc.
Beware of buying insurance in general, when it’s offered alongside something else. For example, when the insurance is offered alongside the purchase of an expensive item like a phone or computer or even as you book a trip to travel somewhere. It may be a good idea to get it or it may not… It’s up to you to decide what’s right in your circumstance. Just investigate the offer thoroughly and don’t leap at every opportunity to do this.
Always shop around and don’t just go for the cheapest policy, it may not cover all your needs. Make sure you compare at least three or more options before picking an insurance for coverage, make sure they offer a good amount of coverage, and ensure you don’t have to pay too big of a deductible. (Meaning make sure that the amount of damages you must cover on your own before the insurance agency steps in, aren’t too large).
Make sure you’re completely covered. Make sure in the policy summary, located in the policy document, that you have EVERYTHING you need for coverage. Remember, typically you can cancel a policy up to after 14 days of purchasing it. (With life insurance and some others its 30 days).
Be sure when you applied for the policy, that you were very accurate with all your answers. People tend to try and fudge the numbers to get their monthly payment down. Don’t do this. It could lead to trouble. The insurer may cancel your policy, or you may reject a claim you make.
Aside from insurance, like I mentioned above, the second thing I’ve really been paying attention to is saving up an emergency savings fund for things like flat tires, emergency trips to the mall (kidding), and of course, the occasional cracked iPhone screen.
You have an emergency savings fund to pay for things that aren’t insured, and you get insurance so you don’t have to completely destroy your emergency savings when accidents happen that you should have been insured for.
It’s important you think of insurance and savings as cushion that provides a more comfortable landing when life and all her surprises knock you over with an unexpected event. Better than landing on cold hard concrete and having to just dole out money from your savings. This leads to bleeding out eventually and then heading into debt.
Be smart with how your run your life and your funds. Your survival depends on it. Once you can survive, you can learn to thrive. Thriving is the bomb.

Obamacare Is Radically Changing The Individual Insurance Market — And That’s A Very Good Thing

By Igor Volsky

Reading and watching this morning’s news coverage about individuals and families receiving notices that their current health care plans don’t meet the minimum requirements of the Affordable Care Act, you’d think that insurers have never before cancelled people’s health care coverage. It’s as if the the individual health care market had offered substantive and comprehensive insurance before the law came along in 2010 and forced the good and trusted folks at Wellpoint, Aetna, Cigna, or United Health to suddenly undo your plan.
So it’s easy to forget in all the decontextualized reporting why the law’s minimum standards were written in the first place and what kind of policies they’re seeking to regulate.
Before the Affordable Care Act went into effect, in most states, Americans were routinely denied coverage in the individual health insurance market if they suffered from serious medical conditions like diabetes, hepatitis C, multiple sclerosis, schizophrenia, quadriplegia, Parkinson’s disease and AIDS/HIV or had relatively benign problems like acne. Some people who had been prescribed Abilify and Zyprexa for mental disorders as well as Neupogen, which is used to treat the side effects of chemotherapy, or even insulin were also routinely turned away or priced out of insurance.
Many insurers, after all, wanted to keep people who incurred substantial health care costs from buying coverage, reasoning that if they only extended insurance to young and healthy people, those individuals would pay-in monthly premiums and almost rarely use their health care benefits, meaning the company would stand to profit. 
 
While employers cannot deny sick people insurance, the individual market was overseen by the states and in the vast majority, insurance companies were permitted to “reject individuals for coverage based on their health status, occupation, or even their recreational activities.” Before the Affordable Care Act went into effect, just five states prohibited issuers from cherry-picking the healthiest consumers and few limited how much an insurer can increase an individual’s premiums.
Healthy people benefited from a system that denied coverage to the (relatively) sick — but only if they never incurred medical expenses themselves. If they fell ill or began incurring substantial cost, companies would find any reason to cancel their plans — often by claiming that they failed to reveal a major medical condition. (Theoretically, federal law protects consumers from rescission and policy cancellations that are arbitrary, but companies often “do not follow federal standards and instead follow state laws that offer weaker consumer protections.”)
The news was fraught with insurers breaking the law to cancel applicants’ policies. In August of 2008, Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield agreed “to pay a total of $13 million in fines and to offer new health coverage to more than 2,200 Californians the companies dropped after they became ill.” Later that same year, Health Net Inc. reached a settlement with the California Department of Insurance, agreeing “to offer new coverage to 926 customers who were dropped from individual or family policies in the years since 2004.” And in 2010, even after the Affordable Care Act was signed into law, an investigation revealed that WellPoint — the nation’s largest insurer — stretched the nation’s lose anti-rescission laws to cancel health insurance coverage for individuals when they need it most. The insurer used a computer algorithm that automatically targeted “policyholders recently diagnosed with breast cancer” and investigated them for “fraud.” To make matters worse, the company lied to prosecutors about the practice, falsely stating that it had changed its procedures for canceling the policies of patients after they become ill.
Remember, this was a system in which more than 60 percent of medical bankruptcies occurred to people who already had insurance: the coverage just wasn’t good enough and shifted too much cost to the consumer.
The Affordable Care Act’s grandfather rules and the minimum standard benefit requirements came out of these experiences and frustrations. They establish a federal floor of consumer protection that prevents insurers from shifting the cost and risk of health care to the individual and puts an end to the kind of practices that plagued the consumer driven health care market for years. By 2014 almost all plans will have to meet the new requirements.
Many young and healthy beneficiaries who are currently receiving cancellation notices from individual insurers are understandably upset that they have to change policies. They like the individual plan they currently have but only because they rarely use the coverage they purchase at those attractively low premium rates. But past experience shows that the policy you think you like because you’re healthy today won’t be there when you become sick tomorrow. You may be paying a low monthly premium, but the out-of-pocket health care costs you incur after falling ill could send you into bankruptcy.
Under reform, you’ll find more comprehensive insurance in the exchanges, sometimes at lower cost than what you’re paying now. But even if the monthly premiums are higher, you’ll be paying for better care that will cover more services should you fall ill. You’ll also be contributing to a system in which everyone can always sign-up for health care coverage.
So Obama’s promise — if you like your coverage you can keep it — was missing several key caveats. It’s true that most individuals enrolled in employer based plans can maintain their policies — those plans already meet the new requirements. But for Americans in the individual health care market who have policies that don’t provide you with comprehensive insurance or have substantially changed since 2010, the regulations in the Affordable Care Act mean that you will not be able to keep what you have. Instead, you’ll have to enroll in something better.
Update:
Here is how Marilyn Tavenner — the head of CMS, the agency responsible for implementing the law — responded to questions about what she would tell an American who has received a cancellation notice during Tuesday’s health care hearing:


Life Insurance Ugh Why

“We need to talk.”
Why would he do that to me? Was he trying to raise my blood pressure, a la that brilliantly diabolical email exchange? Didn’t he know I never want to talk in the evenings after wrangling and feeding and finally managing to steamroll the toddler and get her to sleep, at least not about seriously and weighty matters such as end-of-life planning?
I glared at my husband, who should know better. He glared back. With a theatrical sigh, I stopped playing Words With Friends on my phone and said, “Okay, fine.”
He wanted to talk about life insurance.
We used to have a policy, back when we were both gainfully employed, or rather he did. It came via his law office and guaranteed me, I don’t know, some huge amount of money should he get snuffed out. I didn’t like to think about it, frankly, and never found out the details. When his corporate gig ended, so did the insurance.
“Do you get anything?” I asked him at some point. “For all that money you put in?”
“Nope,” he said. Nothing but peace of mind.
“God!” I said. “What a racket.”
He explained to me, carefully and with a minimum of emotion, why life insurance — term, in our case, for at least until Babygirl goes to college — is not a racket but rather an excellent investment, even if there is not a return. I knew he was probably right but the topic made me simultaneously bored and anxious, and I wriggled away as fast as I could by promising I’d look into it.
Well, so, I’m researching. Here’s some Investopedia background on term life insurance:
term life insurance is the best choice for most individuals because it is the least expensive type of life insurance and leaves money free for other investments. Permanent life insurance, the other major category of life insurance, allows policyholders to accumulate cash value, while term does not, but there are expensive management fees and agent commissions associated with permanent policies, and many financial advisers consider these charges a waste of money. …
When you buy a term policy, all of your premiums go toward securing a death benefit for your beneficiaries, who are usually your spouse or children. Term life insurance, unlike permanent life insurance, does not have any cash value and therefore does not have any investment component. However, you can think of term life insurance as an investment in the sense that you are paying relatively little in premiums in exchange for a relatively large death benefit.
For example, a nonsmoking 30-year-old woman in excellent health might be able to get a 20-year term policy with a death benefit of $1 million for $480 per year. If this woman dies at age 49 after paying premiums for 19 years, her beneficiaries will receive $1 million tax-free when she paid in just $9,120. Term life insurance provides an incomparable return on investment should your beneficiaries ever have to use it. That being said, it provides a negative return on investment if you are in the majority of policyholders whose beneficiaries never file a claim. In that case, you will have paid a relatively low price for peace of mind, and you can celebrate the fact that you’re still alive.
The tax-free part is important and worth underlining: life-insurance payouts do not count as gross income and do not need to be reported to the IRS. (Maybe that’s why they’re so appealing to potential murderers?) Still, $480 a year is $480 a year. If I pay someone nearly $10,000, shouldn’t I at least get a used car or an MFA out of it?
CNN Money says I should suck it up:
Contrary to what all too many insurance agents will tell you, you almost certainly don’t need to have life insurance for your entire life. You need it most when you’re a young adult with young kids, when you have yet to build up assets that your family can fall back on if something happens to you. If you die while your children are still in diapers, where’s the money going to come from to raise and educate them? Right: life insurance. Once they’re grown up, you no longer need it.
Do you do the mature thing and pay for life insurance, for the sake of your kids and/or your spouse? Or are you throwing caution to the winds and encouraging others to do so too?

How to Get Better Health Insurance as a Small Business Owner

Health insurance is a common perk for full-time employees. But where does that leave small business owners, freelancers, independent contractors, and other self-employed individuals? Trying to get health insurance as a small business owner is more difficult — since you’ll have to do all the research and work yourself — and in many cases, more expensive — since you won’t have an employer to help you manage the costs.
As a result, most small business owners end up with less coverage than they really need, or worse — with no coverage at all. So how can small business owners get better health insurance?
Why Health Insurance Is So Important
If you’re in good health or haven’t had a recent need for a hospital or physician, you might first think that health insurance isn’t truly necessary. You may end up paying hundreds of dollars a month for something you never tap into, right?
The truth is that insurance is a kind of gamble. There is a chance that you never use it, and in that scenario, you’d lose money. But there’s also the chance that you’re involved in an unpreventable accident, or develop a life-threatening condition, and with hospital bills that range in five or six figures (or even more), insurance is a practical necessity. For example, if you develop cancer, you’ll want to visit one of the best oncological centers in the country, like the Rush University Cancer Center or the Mayo Clinic. Having health insurance in this situation could prevent you from falling into years — or even decades — of paying off debts, and ensure you get the care you need to survive.
In addition to that, having health insurance today will help you avoid major tax penalties in coming years. For any month that you don’t have a qualifying insurance package, you’ll owe either 2.5 percent of your income or $695 per adult in your household who went without coverage, whichever is higher. There are maximum fees based on the number of people in your household, and there are some qualified exemptions, but it’s still in your best interest to opt for insurance.
What can small business owners do to get decent coverage that isn’t terribly expensive? There are several options:
A spouse’s policy. If your spouse is currently employed full-time and they have a health insurance policy through their employer, you may be able to sign up for it. Most spouses are qualified for health insurance programs, with a proportional increase in premiums. Be sure to check the quality of the policy before proceeding, as different employers offer different levels of coverage. One of the only problems here is that most employers’ health insurance programs have limited “enrollment windows” during which you’re allowed to make changes to your policy. This is for underwriting purposes, and to ensure individuals don’t sign on as a temporary way to deal with a health concern. Usually, this enrollment period lasts for at least one month out of the year, so depending on your timing, it could be difficult to join. As a plus side, this is one of the easiest options to manage; your spouse will continue managing their policy as usual, with a higher premium, but no extra hassle.
A parent’s policy. Under the current legislation, it’s legal to join or remain under a parent’s health insurance policy until you’re 26. That doesn’t do you any good if you’re older than 26, but if you’re younger, keep in mind that this remains an option even if you get married, have a child of your own, live out of the home, and aren’t filed as a tax dependent. Your parents’ policy will need to be changed, of course, but it’s an available and relatively simple option if you’re young and don’t know what to do.
The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) is a piece of legislation that mandates employers to continue an employee’s health insurance coverage after they leave, under certain conditions. If you’ve recently left your employer in pursuit of a career freelancing, this may be an available option to you; just keep in mind that this is designed to be temporary until you can find a more suitable long-term policy. What’s nice about COBRA is that it’s legally mandated to be an option to any employee who leaves for any reason other than a termination due to gross misconduct. After the departure, employers have 14 days to extend a formal “election notice” to an employee, which gives them the ability to sign onto COBRA. Your premiums will remain mostly the same, with an additional fee to cover administrative costs that hover around 2 percent. Your COBRA coverage will last 18 months, which should be more than enough time to make it to your next open enrollment window.
The Affordable Care Act. Through the Affordable Care Act (ACA), you will likely be able to enroll in a new insurance plan from one of many different insurance providers. All of these are designed to be accessible to people who don’t have a healthcare option through their employer, so most of them will offer reasonable coverage for a reasonable premium. Be sure to compare and contrast insurance offers you find here, but you may want to act soon, as the Republican Party is currently attempting to repeal the legislation.
Like most other forms of insurance, you must apply for new coverage during the open enrollment period. However, there are some special circumstances that apply. For example, if you qualify for Medicaid or CHIP, both of which are aimed at low-income individuals, you may be able to apply for coverage immediately. You may also qualify for a special enrollment period due to a significant change in your life, such as losing qualified forms of coverage within the past 60 days, getting married, having a child, moving to a new primary residence, or seeing a drastic change in your income level.
Local organizations. Finally, you may be able to find insurance through a local organization. Small business coalitions, freelancer organizations, and other employee benefits companies may be able to point you in the right direction or even provide you with a policy directly. Ask other small business owners in your area about their healthcare coverage, and see if they know of any worthwhile resources to tap.
Entering the Full-Time Workforce
If you find the options available to small business owners to be underwhelming, or if you want a more comprehensive, reliable, or inexpensive policy, you may consider joining the workforce full-time again.
Using the experience and contacts you cultivated as a small business owner, you could easily land a job doing what you do now. The problem, of course, is that you aren’t guaranteed to get comprehensive healthcare coverage just because you’re working full-time; still, on average, employers cover 83 percent of the costs of healthcare. That’s a significant amount to save, so if you’re making as much full-time as you would while self-employed, it’s an important move to consider.
What to Look for in an Insurance Policy
Just because you can get health insurance doesn’t mean it’s the best coverage available to you. As you may have guessed, however, there’s no such thing as one “right” form of insurance that’s appropriate for everyone. Before you enroll in any new policy, make sure you fully understand the following:
First, you’ll need different types of coverage for different areas of health. General health insurance policies, for example, don’t frequently cover optometry services or glasses. Dental and vision insurance are usually offered as separate add-ons to your main coverage.
Your premiums are the amount of money you pay to the insurance company every month, regardless of whether you’ve used any medical services. this is an amount of money you’ll need to budget for, and it’s unlikely to change often.
Your deductibles will vary, depending on the plan you choose. This is the amount of money you’ll pay out of pocket when utilizing medical services. There are usually deductibles for things like office visits, medical equipment, and prescription medications.
Metal levels. There are generally four “levels” of plans you can choose: Bronze, Silver, Gold, and Platinum. The quality of care you receive at every level is the same, but each level has a different cost distribution system you’ll need to pay attention to. For example, Bronze packages have lower premiums but higher deductibles.
Network availability. Different plans also have different forms of network coverage, which means you may be limited in the doctors and facilities you can visit while still remaining covered.
The type of coverage you’re able to get will vary based on a variety of factors, including your current health, your age, your income, your risk factors, and how many people you’re trying to insure. Because it’s hard to compare apples to apples, be sure to look at plans from multiple different providers before you finalize your decision. Ultimately, you’ll want the best policy you can reasonably afford — and only you can determine what that means.
How to Get Better Health Insurance as a Small Business Owner was originally published on Due on March 31, 2017 by Serenity Gibbons.

Tech experts unite on “Bad Luck Needn’t Suck” insurance consumer insight campaign
Pocket-lint, the UK’s leading independent consumer tech site and personal insurance store Worry+Peace collaborate on a breakthrough gadget consumer insight project
Worry+Peace, UK fintech’s pre-eminent personal insurance store, and Pocket-lint, the UK’s leading independent gadget site, announce a breakthrough new insight project called “Bad Luck Needn’t Suck”, that will see them working together to create a consumer-friendly content hub forGadget Insurance and lots more.
Billed as ‘way more than just an ad-deal’, the project will see Worry+Peace as the tech lifestyle site’s first ever Gadget Insurance Partner, working on a range of content opportunities across multiple channels.
The “Bad Luck Needn’t Suck” campaign/deal has been signed on an initial 4-month basis. The pilot deal promises to challenge some of the traditional commentators in the area and offer Worry+Peace a chance to speak to consumers in the very place they’re exploring what technology to buy.
“Improving the way people buy insurance means getting close to real life. Finding the folks that truly live and breathe consumer tech such as the great team over at Pocket-lint, and working with them to improve our insight. We want insurance consumers to know and understand our strapline: You’re the influence,” said Worry+Peace founder James York.
As well as brand signposts and display, central to the project is a content focus, with a new Gadget Insurance hub, hosted by Pocket-lint and shared on Worry+Peace. It is here where customers will be able to ask questions, challenge Worry+Peace and work with the brand to help enhance and improve its store in the future.
Worry+Peace began inviting customers to browse its virtual shelves in May — launching a range of Gadget Insuranceunderwritten by a specialist insurance partnership between UK General and Ageas (a large A-rated, EU-wide insurer). This move to work in marketing channels that offer closer engagement with consumers is typical of the challenger-brand mentality Worry+Peace is championing.
“We felt there was a great brand fit between what Worry+Peace are clearly doing and our reader-focused ethos. We’re glad we found an insurance store that’s both modern and customer obsessed,” said Ricky Harewood, Pocket-lint’s commercial director.
Worry+Peace has also recently released its own-brandedTravel Insurance and Cycle Insurance products and the company is rumoured to be working on comparison-site killer plans later this year.
“We are strong believers that ‘Bad Luck needn’t always suck’, hence the name of the campaign! Everything we do is designed to reflect that. With the help of Pocket-lint’s readers, we’ll keep refining that message through our service,” added York.
www.worryandpeace.com
www.pocket-lint.com/worry-and-peace
Worry+Peace’s “Bad Luck Needn’t Suck” consumer insight campaign on Pocket-lint launches late September 2015
For further information or press assets on Worry+Peace and/or interview opportunities with Worry+Peace founder and UK #FinTech guru, James York, please contact Adam Hartley on 07882 982890 / buzz@worryandpeace.com

Insurance for Airbnb Hosts
You will have to purchase additional insurance coverage if you are an Airbnb host, because ordinary homeowners’ and renters’ policies will not cover short-term rentals.
Airbnb and other short-term rentals are not covered because they are commercial activities. Homeowners’ and renters’ polices are designed to cover just your personal possessions. Insurance companies will not reimburse you for damage to your property or possessions caused by a guest.

Nor will the insurance in your mortgage cover Airbnb because it is designed to reimburse the lender only in case something happens to your home. If you are renting your home, your landlords’ insurance will not cover Airbnb or your possessions because it only covers the actual structure and not your property.
This means you will have to purchase additional insurance that specifically covers your short term rental activities. Many insurers will cover home business activities, but this requires different types of coverage.
Why You Need Host Insurance
There are two big reasons why you will need to purchase additional coverage for your short-term rental: liability and protection of your possessions.
Liability means that you are financially responsible for what happens in your place. If your guest trips and falls in the shower and hurts himself, he can sue you. You and not Airbnb will be sued because it is your rental. Liability insurance protects you by paying for legal representation and a settlement if necessary.
Beyond liability you will need to protect your property because standard homeowners and renters policies specifically exclude coverage for losses related to business activities. That means they will not reimburse you if your guests trash your place or steal your stuff.

You should also read your mortgage or lease, because some of those documents require additional insurance for business activities. You might be required to present proof of insurance — in other words a policy at some point.
You will need to get an additional policy that provides both liability coverage and protection for your property. Fortunately such coverage is available but can be hard to find.
Where To Find Insurance For Short-Term Rentals
Short-term rental or host insurance is a small but growing field. A number of companies in the United Kingdom offer host insurance, but can be harder to find in the United States.
Some places you can look for host insurance in the United States include:
Airbnb. Airbnb offers Host Protection insurance to all US hosts at no additional cost. If you list through Airbnb you are automatically covered for eligible claims up to $1 million. Airbnb claims that the policy can serve as your primary protection. More information is available here.
Your insurance agent or insurer. If you have existing homeowners’ or renters coverage, talk to your agent or visit your insurance company’s website. Many insurers will add coverage for business activities to existing policies for a few extra dollars. Allstate and GEICO are now offering policies for Uber and Lyft drivers.
An insurance agent or broker. Generally insurance agents sell policies from one specific company such as State Farm. Brokers offer policies from a wide variety of insurers and some of them can provide specialized coverage. One reason to talk to a local agent or broker is to find out if any additional coverage is mandated by law in your area.
Online insurance brokers. There is a new generation of online insurance brokers, such as Bungalow Insurance, that sell policies from a variety of insurers. Bungalow specializes in the sale of renters’ insurance to Millennials. They currently do not offer host insurance now, but there is a good chance Bungalow Insurance will enter that sector. Another broker, Proper Insurance sells vacation rental insurance in all 50 states. Proper specifically mentions short-term rentals on its webpage. These brokers are worth checking out because they will write policies regular insurers will not touch. Online brokers can also offer lower rates especially for hosts who are listing multiple units.
Making sure that you have proper insurance coverage now can save you from a lot of pain and trouble in the future.
Payfully | Never wait for payments
Payfully offers Airbnb hosts access to the money for any booking as soon as it's confirmed; without having to wait for…www.payfully.co


How to “Lean In” to the Future of Insurance
Ready to evolve your business from survive to thrive in a disrupted insurance marketplace?
Before we get there, we must discuss the problem threatening to destroy the independent insurance channel.
According to a study by Accenture, less than 1/3 (29%) of insurance consumers are satisfied with current insurance provider.
It doesn’t stop there. The same study found that only 1 in 6 (16%) insurance consumers would definitely buy more products from their current insurance provider.
So, what’s our problem?
Insurance consumers believe insurance is a commodity.
How bad is our “commodity” problem?
The commodification of the insurance industry has created $470 billion opportunity in life insurance and property & casualty insurance premiums globally (same Accenture study as above).
These premiums are up for grabs and disruptive insurtech startups, playing to declining customer loyalty and the perceived commoditization of insurance products, view as low hanging fruit.
What should independent agents do?

In an interview I did back in February discussing the fall of Google Compare, Matt Nickerson, President of Safeco Insurance, delivering the defining quote for our industry in 2016″
“It’s time for independent agents to lean in.”
The insurance marketplace is changing.
We can no longer afford to”wait and see” if certain technology becomes standard practice.
Disruption is coming whether we like it or not.
In a disrupted marketplace, it’s the laggards who get mowed down.
I’m not simply talking about innovation. Innovation is defined as new methods, ideas, or products which improve upon an existing process or product.
This might include updating website to be mobile responsive, moving to a cloud-based agency management system or VOIP phone system.
Disruption is a completely different monster.
Disruption is that which causes you to make a fundamental change in business strategy, creates new markets and value networks, and ultimately displaces market leaders who hesitate to adapt.
Disruptive forces threaten the incumbent value chain.
As other industries, from retail to banking to education, profit from deeper customer relationships and enhanced customer experience, the insurance industry is continually marginalized by:
An ever widening set of choices in insurance provider,
Advertising messaging which promotes price and commoditization, and
Laggard technology adoption.
Who let these disruptors in?
Short answer. We did.
Looking out over the incumbent marketplace, opportunities for disruption seem so obvious.
It’s only been a few years since carrier still demanded faxed in submissions and only allowed access to their web portals through Internet Explorer.
Even today, in 2016, we lack widespread adoption of digital sales and marketing strategies inside independent agencies (Unless you’re a member of Agency Nation University).
Not to mention the strong distrust of comparative rating which reverberates through our industry, despite an obvious interest from insurance buyers.
In hindsight, it’s easy to wonder why we didn’t see disruption coming.
But then the old way always seems silly after disruption has happened.
Take the smartphone.
Ten years ago we needed to own many different devices, including:
Digital cameras,
Calculators,
Organizers,
Alarm clocks,
Email readers,
Fax machines,
GPS devices,
Handheld gaming devices,
Electronic book readers,
Video cameras,
Laptop computers,
Cell phone, and
Landline.
The smartphone has replaced all these devices and fits in your pocket.
We take disruption for granted after the fact.
Disruption changes the paradigm.
The insurance paradigm is changing.
My concern, is that as industry, we don’t fully understand why.
It would be easy to blame technology.
Chatbots
The Internet of Things
Mobile
Blockchain
Autonomous Cars
Technology is NOT disrupting the insurance industry.
In today’s fully connected, always-on world, consumers gravitate towards products which fit the way they live and work.
The True Disruption

The true insurance industry disruption was born out of new expectations and higher demands on the insurance customer experience.
Unfortunately, we can’t hide from this disruption.
Word of superior customer experiences now travels the globe in a flash, through text chains, Snapchat and the latest YouTube sensation.
Technology is NOT disrupting the insurance industry. Humans are.
Answering the phone in a friendly and polite manner is simply good customer service.
Good customer service is not enough.
Good customer service is the bar, it’s the barrier to entry. We MUST have good service or we don’t get to play the game.
Delivering a quality customer experience moves beyond providing a good product, with good service, at a good price.
The customer experience is those things, plus everything else the customer wants.
Prioritize customer service over customer experience and you’re already a commodity.
The Human-Centric Model
Disruptive companies are moving away from product-centric models, towards a human-centric model.
Upstarts like Lemonade, Trov and MetroMile, will NOT disrupt because of technology, but rather their ability to harness technology to provide unique human-centric customer experiences.
Lemonade — At it’s core, the peer-to-peer insurance model is simply a mutual insurance company with a fancy deductible methodology. The marketing resonates with consumers due to a lack of trust in large corporate institutions. Consumers feel a sense of empowerment in choosing their own risk pool.
Trov — The on-demand, micro insurance model fits perfectly into the lifestyle and mindset of Millennial consumers. From Trov’s website, “Protect just the things you want — exactly when you want — entirely from your phone.”
Metromile — There will come a day when the “Pay-per-mile” auto insurance model will seem like a no-brainer. Why should a consumer who drives half as much as another (all other things being equal) pay a similar auto insurance premium. Many consumers don’t believe they should.
These insurtech startups are filling gaps in the insurance customer experience with technology (and not the other way around).
It’s time for insurance industry to move to the same side of the table as our customers.
For too long we’ve operated in a product-centric, “Sold, not bought” ecosystem.
Enter the Millennials

By 2025 Millennials net income will exceed $8 Trillion
In 2003, 82 percent** of boomers were part of the labor force; a decade later, declined to 66 percent (source).
Millennials have grown up with choices. It’s called the “Back” button.
Millennials don’t prioritize price, product or relationship. They’re all pieces in the customer experience.
The way it’s always been done is no longer acceptable, because it no longer has to be. At least not for insurance consumers.
Millennial consumers demand a more sophisticated and personalized experience.
“Disruptors in the insurance space believe insurance is a bought product, and it is simply their job to cultivate more demand and create a superior customer experience.” ~ Maria Ferrante-Schepis
This is the reason 56% of insurtech startups focus on distribution and marketing (source)
This is why, according to CBInsights, VC’s are funding insurtech Startups at an insane rate, over $1B in first half of 2016.
Technology does not cause disruption.
How we use it does.
Embrace the New Normal
To move from survive to thrive in a disrupted marketplace, independent insurance agents must embrace a “Bought, not sold” ecosystem.
A life insurance study done in 2014 study by LIMRA and Maddock Douglas found there are almost 19 million “stuck shoppers,” (people who intend to buy life insurance but the current customer experience causes them to get stuck along the way).
It’s not a stretch to believe similar sentiment can be applied to the property & casualty industry as well.
Today, this statistic is a negative, but it ultimately maps out opportunity for those willing to adapt.
We are no longer the gatekeepers of insurance expertise.
Millennials, (and really anyone in the Connected Generation), are using their mobile phone to Google search online reviews at 10:00pm while waiting for the next episode of their favorite Netflix original series to load.
They want information now, in and easy to understand format, at the exact moment they want it.
And they’re not wrong for demanding such from their insurance providers.
Four Mindset Shifts of the New Normal
If we’re going to provide a better insurance customer experience, it’s important to understand the mindset shifts driving the “New Normal.”
Do-it-yourself, comparative shopping
First, pump your own gas; now check yourself out at the grocery. Most purchase decisions are well researched.
Transition from gatekeepers to tour guides (digital/automation).
Consider comparative rating.
Implement 24/7 strategy across business.
De facto product commoditization
Although experts know insurance isn’t a commodity, the public believes it is.
Focus on human-centric business model.
Become a “social” broker.
Prioritize access and availability.
Brian Fanzo, thought leader on the Millennial mindset, shares a defining quote on this idea:
“Social media will not replace a handshake. But social media done right will change the first meeting from a handshake to a hug.”
Distrust of institutions and marketing
Consumers value the experiences of peers and use recommendations in purchasing decisions.
Understand why P2P is gaining momentum.
Harness social proof.
Embrace authenticity.
Rise of the internet of things and mobile
We are online all the time, and expect to be able to get anything we want 24 hours a day.
Deliver mobile experience
Learn nuances of the sharing economy
Accept the Internet of Things underwriting
How to Monetize Disruption
In a Morgan Stanley study, they defined three distinct models pivotal to the future of insurance, many driven by new players:
“Segment of one” distribution
Defined as: Delivering personalized offers that are based on deep customer insight; these models will often be driven by retailers or start-ups. Essentially these specialized or niche models.
Figure out who you serve best and then provide them with a unique customer experience tailored to that market’s specific needs and desires.
One-stop shop distribution
Defined as: Orchestrating a broad array of services that fulfill an integrated set of customer needs — such as “everything I need to lead a healthy life.”
This is the horizontal services play. Figure out all the services are certain type of client could possibly need in your space, (i.e. real estate agent, payroll, legal, notary, etc) and be the solution for all. This could happen in-house or through partnerships.
Connected-object model
Defined as: Offering real-time monitoring of key risk objects, such as cars or homes.
Outlined in the chart below, technology adoption has accelerated to an almost ridiculous pace. The Internet of Things and pay-per insurance technology represent a truly disruption distribution model.
The Rub
The question of when disruption will occur in the insurance industry has been answered.
It’s now.
Disruptors are at the gates.
Traditional methodology will adapt or be swept away inevitable change.
To thrive in the modern marketplace will require an evolved mindset.
Embrace the “Brackish Water,” that place where traditional values meet modern technology, for this is where the insurance customer experience thrives.
Where do we begin?
We must relinquish our focus on customer service or sales or technology.
Replace these with a single focus on customer experience.
All tactics, all strategies, are born from building an exceptional customer experience.
My argument:
Those agents and carriers who lean in to disruption. Those who have the foresight and fortitude to adopt a culture of customer experience will not just survive, but will thrive in the modern insurance marketplace.
Will you “Lean In” to the future of insurance?
Thank you,
Ryan Hanley
P.S. Want more articles like this? Subscribe to our newsletter.
Originally published at Agency Nation on September 15, 2016.
READ MORE
3 Reasons Why P2P Insurtech Start-ups Will Not Disrupt the Insurance Industry
The peer-to-peer (P2P) insurtech movement will not disrupt the insurance industry.medium.com

Yes, there are other frameworks, most notably Whole Life Insurance (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whole_life_insurance). It’s more expensive but it does have a cash value, whereas Term does not.

#FinHealthMatters: Simple Disability Insurance
By: Amanda K. Lettmann

Disability comes quickly and very unexpectedly. One moment you are healthy, another moment you are having open heart surgery — at least that’s what happened to me. In the early 1990’s, I learned dearly the importance of having sound financial health.
At the time I was 29, an avid runner, cyclist, and fitness aficionado. In other words, healthy as a horse, and certainly not thinking I would end up in the hospital for almost a year. I felt run down, had a few doctor’s visits and with no real diagnosis, I self-diagnosed as just being stressed from work. I took a much needed trip to see family and what was going to be a four-day weekend, turned into many months of living in a hospital bed. I was the one in a million person that caught a virus which infects blood cells and essentially tears organs apart.
Thankfully many of my organs gained full health again during that time, however, my heart did not and I required open heart surgery. After my heart reconstruction, I went into recovery for months. As I was too ill to tie my own shoes, let alone to work and draw an income, all in all, I was “on disability” for ten months.
After returning home, I had the shock of seeing $400,000 of medical bill receipts (partially covered by medical insurance). And while that may seem daunting, thankfully one thing I did not have to worry about during that extended illness was how I would be paying my mortgage or providing for my family. I was grateful to have purchased a disability insurance policy prior to becoming ill. 90% of my income was covered for the ten months I couldn’t work — I did not go into excessive debt and I did not lose my home — I had peace of mind, the peace I needed to get better.
What financial health means to me is being aware, educated, and prepared. Unfortunately many Americans are not in the same position of preparedness that I was many years ago. Only 35% of Americans have disability insurance, yet income loss from disabilities account for nearly 50% of today’s mortgage foreclosures. There are nearly 100 million American workers today that don’t have disability insurance and 72% of them don’t have enough savings to cover even short-term emergencies, let alone a longer period of disability. I like to call disability insurance “income protection insurance,” because the loss of income all too often can trigger the snowball effect of financial devastation that millions and millions of Americans have experienced.
Thankfully today I am both physically healthy and financially healthy. Currently, I am the Co-Founder and Chief Operating Officer of Simple Disability Insurance. I use my deeply personal experience with disability insurance, and my twenty years of knowledge and skill with business transformation, to deliver innovative technology to financial institutions that allows disability insurance to be sold and purchased in aSimple way. I am inspired to provide the American consumers with knowledge, awareness, and a way to financially prepare themselves — all components of good financial health. ___________________________________________________________________
This blog post originally appeared June 29, 2016 on LinkedIn. It was one of 10 winners of a national #FinHealthMatters Day essay contest created by CFSI. MetLife Foundation is a major sponsor of CFSI’s ongoing consumer financial health work. To learn more about FinHealthMatters from CFSI, sign up here.


Blockchain-Powered Revolution in the Insurance Industry
Read the full story here
Last year, >$1.2 billion was invested in InsurTech startups — six times the amount invested in 2010, making the insurance industry one of the most exciting areas of innovation with the highest disruption potential for tech-powered startups. According to a 2015 report from WEF, “The most imminent effects of disruption will be felt in the banking sector; however, the greatest impact of disruption is likely to be felt in the insurance sector.”
But what does disruption in the insurance industry mean and how will it occur? The answer may be contained in the understanding of the role of blockchain technology in the future of insurance. The range of benefits that distributed ledger could carry for the insurance industry is vast and is being actively explored by industry professionals in order to capitalize on emerging opportunities.
Blockchain has been recently emphasized by the Institute of International Finance as one of the emerging technologies in the insurance industry due to the capability to increase automation and lower the cost of providing insurance. And since there is a whole ecosystem of InsurTech supporters and blockchain doesn’t lack financial attention (among the 15 largest VC FinTech deals of 2016 so far, three went to blockchain startups), the inevitable shift towards tech-powered insurance may become a reality soon down the road.
One of the ways distributed ledger is expected to increase efficiency is by automating identity validation. As IFF explained, this would help address a key concern facing insurers when providing microinsurance in emerging markets — the lack of reliable ID papers among the population.
Moreover, IFF research also implies that by providing a universal source of truth that is tamper-proof, blockchain could also lead to increased efficiency — resulting from a reduction in human error, fraud, data duplication, processing delays, transaction and administrative costs and opaqueness — ultimately benefiting the end-consumer with better service and lower premiums.
Find out more here
Another aspect we have been emphasizing before is related to smart contracts, which — in conjunction with real-time data capture and recording — can be applied to automate the claims settlement. Claims can be verified by insurance agents and recorded on blockchain in order to trigger the right contract execution. Blockchain-powered automation can significantly reduce the time of settlement and streamline the operations in an efficient manner. Customers, in that case, would be the ones to benefit the most as the waiting time for payments would drop drastically.
A similar application has been noted by IFF, which suggests that smart contracts can enable individuals to purchase smart insurance contract products on their mobile phones that automatically deliver claim payouts when a predetermined condition is verified by an external data source.
There is a range of other important ways distributed ledger technology is believed to have a transformative effect on the insurance industry. Willis Towers Watson, a multinational risk management, insurance brokerage and advisory company, has recently summarized floating ideas on blockchain-powered revolution in the insurance industry in one chart:

Source: Willis Towers Watson Blog
The most important part of this chart explains the opportunity to reach the underserved. Although microinsurance by design was aimed to make insurance products more accessible for underserved, it has certain hurdles reaching that group of the world’s population.
Some of the challenges include the lack of reliable data and identification documents from the target population, the need for simple products that can be quickly bought on mobile devices, and the huge acquisition and administration costs associated with very low customer loyalty and a high volume of policy cancellations, as explained by WTW. Most of these issues can be mastered with completely mobile platforms that use smart contracts, as we have discussed before.
One of all six ways blockchain could disrupt, insurance has probably the most far-reaching implication — disintermediation. Professionals from WTW suggest that a decentralized consortium network of insurance carriers, which manages all of its transactions online, could eliminate the need for intermediaries for less complex coverages, e.g., auto insurance and mass-market products. Disintermediation in the insurance industry means structural transformation of the industry, its curation from mediators that may have a significant impact on end pricing and reach.
Continue reading here

Obamacare Has Helped Americans Save Nearly $2 Billion On Their Insurance Premiums
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
Millions of Americans can expect to get a refund from their insurance companies this year, at an average of about $80 dollars per family, thanks to a little-known Obamacare provision that’s helping people save money on their premiums. According to a new report released by the Health and Human Services Department on Thursday, Americans across the country have received a total of $1.9 billion dollars in rebates since this provision first took effect in 2011.
Obamacare’s medical loss ratio provision — which is also frequently referred to as the “80/20 rule” — requires insurers to spend at least 80 percent of every American’s premium costs on their medical care, rather than on the company’s own profits or administrative overhead. If insurance companies don’t hit the right balance, they have to issue a refund check to their customers to make up for it.
According to HHS’s calculations, 6.8 million Americans will save $330 million in refunds this year because of the 80/20 rule. Insurance companies are required to provide those reimbursements by no later than the beginning of August. Not everyone will actually receive a physical check in the mail; insurers are allowed to apply the reimbursements to future premiums, so the savings could show up that way.
In a press release announcing the new data, HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell said that the health reform law is giving Americans a “better value for their premium dollars.” The whole point of the 80/20 rule is to encourage insurance companies to operate more efficiently and cut down on their overhead — and it’s slowly working. The portion of premium dollars allocated to insurers’ profits and administrative costs dropped from 15.3 percent in 2011 to 11.7 percent in 2013.
HHS estimates that if insurers weren’t making those type of changes, Americans would have likely paid about $3.8 billion in additional premiums in 2013. Altogether, since the medical loss ratio took effect three years ago, the administration calculates that it’s averted $9 billion dollars worth of unnecessarily high insurance premiums.
The 80/20 rule isn’t the only Obamacare provision that seeks to keep premium costs affordable. The health law also extends federal subsidies to help Americans purchase plans on the individual market in the new state-level insurance exchanges, something that allows millions of people to buy health care for less than $100 each month. However, under a lawsuit against the health law that could make its way up to the Supreme Court, those subsidies could be put into jeopardy in the majority of states in the country. If that happens, insurance premiums could increase by about 75 percent.


How Blockchain Technology Can Improve the Insurance Industry
Read the full story here.
While blockchain technology is no news anymore, a range of possible application seems to be piling up at an impressive pace. The insurance industry is no exclusion as professionals are looking for ways to apply distributed ledger technology to transform the 4.5-trillion-dollar industry.
One of the applications of blockchain-enabled smart contracts — as seen by professionals — is in building a P2P or crowdfunded insurance model. The new model would focus on supply and demand matching and risk calculation, where insurers will build a marketplace platform for potential customers to post their customized requirements for insurance plans. Insurers would apply their risk assessment techniques to perform necessary calculations. Once the calculations are finalized, insurers can place their premium estimations giving a chance for investors to subscribe to the plan.
Aside from all operations being done on the blockchain, smart contacts are entering the game when it comes to the guarantee of payment from the investor when the event for which the customer has demanded the insurance happens.
Find out more here.
Needless to say, the process of verifying and approving the insurance claim becomes much more efficient and easy for insurers when recorded on the blockchain.
Inviting the innovative solutions into the traditional and complex landscape of insurance industry, Scott Gottlieb, resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute (AEI), shared ideas using technology to design more intuitive insurance risk pools. As Mr. Gottlieb suggested, technologically advanced (in particular, blockchain) risk pools would enable real-time auto-regulation of insurance subsidies. As AEI believes, such a system can be powered by blockchain technology.
In addition to shedding light onto new business models in the insurance industry, blockchain can be applied to increase transparency of the products insured. Recorded on the blockchain, the characteristics and the history of the product can significantly cut the time and cost of human-powered assessment and keep records of the history of the product to increase the accuracy of risk assessment and premium calculation. The diamonds industry is the closest with Everledger, a company that provides an immutable ledger for diamond identification and transaction verification for various stakeholders, from insurance companies to claimants and law enforcement agencies.
Another application of blockchain technology in the insurance industry has been explored and brought to life earlier in March. London’s commercial think tank Z/Yen recently announced to have created an insurance product that employs a distributed ledger technology to confirm counterparty obligations.
Michael Mainelli of Z/Yen has commented, “The system is really based on timestamping and auditing who has used these documents.” He added, “There have always been suspicions that insurers could change the data on what the situation was in the past.” Z/Yen was behind one among the few other uses of blockchain in the UK insurance market.
Blem, a company that makes IT systems for the industry is all set to become one of the companies to make use of blockchain in a live product. Blem’s CEO Gavin Blem says, “The opportunity that timestamping provides is certainly that the information provided to the reinsurer existed at a particular moment in time and has not been changed since.” The company will be using the technology to record permanently the details of claims so that insurers and their reinsurers can divide the cost accurately between them.
Recording information about the product on blockchain not only allows to keep accurate hard-to-temper track and make more accurate calculations. The information can be accumulated in a pool of accessible data in real-time for companies to update and share with each other to cut the costs of maintaining private records and spending personnel time on underwriting. In that case, insurers and third parties will have access to vast amount of verified and accurate information that will enhance the quality and accuracy of the plans offered to customers by the industry overall.
Continue reading here.

Important Highlights Of ‘Internet Of Insurance’ | 25–27 Sept.,2017 | Austin, TX

Building on the success of our inaugural 2016 New York City event, the Internet of Insurance US is the only business conference for insurance carriers capitalizing on the IoT opportunity. The Internet of Insurance connects insurers who are ready to drive their digital, IoT-powered business forward.
Taking place September 25–27, 2017 at the Four Seasons Hotel in Austin, TX the Internet of Insurance gathers C-and- VP-level insurance executives to network and share best practices on IoT and AI implementation. The two-day conference will help insurers navigate digital disruption and transition them into a more customer-centric product offering by adopting IoT, AI and data analytics.
The agenda for the conference was crafted by Juan Monge, Internet of Business’s Program and Content Manager for the US; with the help of the Internet of Insurance Advisory Board. The Board members are senior industry leaders, committed to identifying and nurturing innovation across the insurance business. These experts guided Monge to outline the key topics for the 2017 agenda. Some of the titles of the Advisory Board include Head of Global Innovation Lab, Chief Global Architect for Insurance, Director of Claims, VP of Innovation and Chief Operating Officer; from companies like QBE, IBM Watson, John Hancock, AIG and Journey. Some of the key topics include:
- Adapting Insurance Business Models to the Digital Reality;
- Reducing Claims and Loss Ratios through IoT;
- Insuring the Sharing Economy;
- Becoming Consumer-centric in the Digital Age;
- How Autonomous Vehicles Will Impact Insurance Premiums;
- Streamlining a Cybersecurity Strategy;
- Utilizing Wearables in Life Insurance and Workers’ Compensation.
The conference will explore how IoT can minimize risk, prevent claims and allow insurers to differentiate product offering in an increasingly competitive market place. To ensure unbiased content and that the Internet of Insurance is dedicated to promoting the advancement of the industry only, there are no sales pitches allowed during presentations. Attendees go through a vetting process to ensure that the room is full of senior end-users, ready to make informative decisions on IoT and AI buying.
Given the conference pre-qualifies attendees to ensure a good balance between end-users and vendors, the Internet of Business, organizer of the event, helps facilitate meetings between qualified decision- makers and solution-providers. These one-to- one business meetings, round-table discussions, breakfast briefings and networking dinners are part of the unique Internet of Insurance US business model.
If you are interested in joining 250+ attendees, learning from 60+ industry speakers and networking thought-leaders, join us at the 2 nd Annual Internet of Insurance US in Austin, TX on September 25–27,2017.
For more information, call +1.857.214.2240 or email info@iob-media.com
To register go to: https://internetofbusiness.com/events/internet-of- insurance-usa/

How do you practically get the insurance companies to dissolve themselves? Curiously they don’t want to go. Hillary has been trying for over 20 years, as has Bernie.

Exactly. Health insurance is not sustainable. We need an entirely different financing system for health care…like single payer

Startup Q&A #9: Online Business Tools, Health Insurance, Finding Investors, and Formal Education

Watch or Listen to This Episode:
Watch on YouTube (Video)
Watch on Facebook (Video)
Download MP3 File (Audio)
Subscribe to Startup Q&A
Subscribe via YouTube (Video)
Subscribe via iTunes (Audio)
Subscribe via Stitcher (Audio)
Subscribe via Google Play Music (Audio)
Subscribe via RSS (Audio)
Tip of the week: read The Automatic Customer by John Warrilow
This Week’s Questions
What are some tools that you use in your business, especially ones that maybe no one has ever heard of before? — Jaime Masters
How do you navigate health insurance as a self employed individual? — Anonymous
How do you find investors to invest in your business? — Katie Day
Do you recommend formal education for a new entrepreneur? (BS in Business Administration, MBA, basic accounting class, etc.) — Lisa Groon
Submit a Question: Do you have a question you would like answered on an upcoming episode of Startup Q&A? Submit your question here.

Should startup employees have health insurance?
Benefits are an important part of your employees’ compensation package, and healthcare is at the top of the list of what you can offer. Employers have to seriously consider whether healthcare is something they should provide or have provided, and even if the mutual decision is yes, then it can be difficult depending on where your startup and employees are based right now.
For example — it is common knowledge that the U.S. healthcare system is prohibitively expensive and convoluted. Even with overpriced insurance, an estimated 1 in 3 Americans have difficulty paying their medical bills and find themselves racked with medical debt due to high premiums, coverage limits, and other charges. In fact, according to NerdWallet, medical bankruptcy currently accounts for the majority of personal bankruptcies.

On this map you can see the countries marked in green that provide universal healthcare — the U.S isn’t one of them. Considering the expensive and difficult system, it probably comes as no surprise that the U.S. healthcare system is consistently poorly rated when compared to healthcare systems in other developed countries.
Larger companies in the U.S. are mandated to provide health insurance by law — the requirement applies to firms that employ 50 or more full-time employees. These costs, which can vary, are estimated to be around $200–300 per month per employee, depending on how much the employer wishes to subsidize. Because healthcare expenditures are increasing by around 15–20% year over year, many larger companies are choosing to cut down on the amount of coverage they are subsidizing.
Back to the original question: should your startup be making sure that your employees have health insurance? We believe so — Teleport strongly supports the idea that everyone should have access to solid baseline healthcare, and taking care of that issue is a good way to show your employees they’re appreciated. There are also several potential benefits for the employer — there’s plenty of research on health coverage helping employers recruit and retain high-quality workers and contributing to productivity by reducing the costs of absenteeism and turnover.
Also, even though smaller startups (those with fewer than 50 full time-employees) are technically exempt from the aforementioned U.S. employer mandate of having to provide insurance, they have the disadvantage of having to constantly compete for and win over talent against the bigger players, so many startups really cannot and should not afford to skimp on this particular “perk”. Forbes estimates that 65% of all startups with 16–50 employees provide healthcare insurance.
So, you’ve decided to provide healthcare benefits to your startup employees. What can you do to make it as painless as possible? One solution to this expensive problem would be to “diversify” your startup locations, and spend less time in countries where the healthcare system is broken. In countries where the system is not broken, the national government provides complete coverage, and the company is not involved at all. Most of these countries do this through compulsory but government-subsidized public insurance plans, such as the UK’s National Health Service.
Another solution would be to provide some sort of international insurance, for example Cigna, Integra Global or Bupa — these plans have various different conditions so make sure you know for sure that the international health plan you end up choosing really suits your needs as well as your employees’. Lastly, you can simply choose to relocate your startup altogether, and move it to a country with lower healthcare costs.
As we’re building out Teleport’s data coverage for startup hubs around the world, we are including information on both the cost and the quality of healthcare to ensure that you are always able to make informed decisions about these issues with ease.
Teleport builds software for startup people to help them seamlessly move from place to place. We’ll be launching a global search product for startups soon — get all the important updates and latest news before anyone else by signing up to the Teleport newsletter here.
Originally published at teleport.org on March 11, 2015.

How to Use Health Insurance
Hi friends.
If you’re reading this article, you already know that our health care system is a mess. I’ve had a sudden crisis myself recently and learned a number of things about how to manage it that I’d like to document and share with you, in the hope of helping others avoid massive, unexpected bills.
My insurance provider right now is Aetna. I’m sure experiences differ across insurers, but some of these things point toward how many systems I’ve been in seem to work.
First, a few notes on the user experience:
The system is difficult by design. It isn’t you. It is extremely difficult to determine precisely what you are entitled to and who you can see. Searching “find a doctor” in my portal, for example, is astonishingly difficult from a UX perspective (not to mention the very slow response times from the database), and the information usually proves to be very different from what I learn when I call the provider or the insurer. This level of difficulty has the effect of pushing people away from seeking care that they might need, or seeking it out-of-pocket from providers who don’t even try to work within the system. This saves the insurance provider money in the short-term, but can have lasting consequences for human health, especially for those who can’t just pay out-of-pocket for the care they need.
The system is difficult for the provider, too. Multiple providers have lamented to me the complexity of the system and how hard it is for them to know whether a procedure will be covered. They seem to have a harder time connecting both with the providers’ technology systems and with human helpers within the insurance administration.
The system is difficult for those who work in insurance administration as well. Information seems to not be streamlined for them, either. I heard from a provider that the insurance only allows updates two times a year. This means that there is a long window for credentialing new specialists, and that if someone is let go from an office, they will still be in the system on the insurer’s side.
In other words, there is no single place to go for accurate, real-time information. Here are some ways that I’ve been able to work around that:
Ask very specific questions about your coverage.
One very frustrating conversation with my insurer concerned the amount that would be covered for an out-of-network provider. I was told the service would be covered at “60 percent.” Sixty percent of what? I asked. I had to ask several times before I got the answer, “60 percent of the allowable rate.” What’s the allowable rate? I asked. That took several phone calls and nearly two hours to find out. But then, it turned out that this statement was not true, either. It was 60 percent of whatever the provider charged, up to the allowable rate.
In other words, to put this in quasi-mathemetical terms, my benefit was:
0.6 x (amount charged), if (amount charged) < (allowable rate) 
0.6 x (allowable rate), if (amount charged) > or equal to (allowable rate)
This appears to be a common mechanism for processing out-of-network claims, but there is little transparency around it.
Check your provider’s National Provider Identification (NPI).
Every provider has a ten-digit numerical code that tracks them across multiple systems. Within the same location or health care provider, there may be some doctors who are covered by your insurer and some who are not. The only way to check for sure is to call your insurer with the name, address, and NPI to make sure they are currently (to the best of your insurer’s representative’s knowledge) covered in the system.
Check the procedure code(s).
The procedure code is typically a 5-digit number that indicates what kind of service was provided. Even with the same provider, services may be covered differently or not at all. Often, multiple procedure codes are used within the same visit. (For example, “acupuncture” isn’t just acupuncture; it might also include the code for “naturopathy.”) Once you have verified the provider’s NPI, you should check with your provider’s office about the specific procedure codes they will use, so you can be sure these are covered in your benefits.
Do it yourself.
Do not push this task off onto your provider. It is often harder for doctors to reach the insurance companies directly, and it takes up valuable time. Most providers, if the insurance denies the claim, will still hold you responsible for the balance. Rather than putting yourself at risk and stressing out your provider, you can make these phone calls relatively easily and be all but certain that your care will be covered.
Take care of yourself before it becomes a crisis.
When getting regular health care is so mentally taxing, it can be tempting to avoid it altogether. Many of us, even healthy, well-adjusted adults, can ignore issues until they become a full-blown crisis. However, the ER is the most expensive and stressful way to resolve issues. This is in part because of the level of fees. You may receive several bills for an ER visit: one for the treatment itself, one for the facility, and one for the doctors’ network.
Document everything.
Because the systems are not up-to-date, even if you take all of the steps above, you may end up with an insurer claiming that your doctor or procedure was not covered. If you call to verify, mark the date and time of your conversation, the name of the person you spoke with, and the exact NPI and procedure code. This way, if your insurer pushes you, you have data with which to push back.
Stay calm.
This level of system failure is frustrating for everyone. As a technologist who understands how much leaner all of this could be, it is difficult not to be gobsmacked by the level of inefficiency in the current system. As a person who cares about human health, it is painful to see how this results in people not getting the care they need. As a person who spent many years in government, another highly regulated system that is many years behind, it is hard for me to see how this impacts the health care workers whose time and resources would be better spent treating patients than fighting with the system.
I can easily imagine a system that would work better for all parties — patients, doctors, facilities, pharmacists, insurers, and those who support patients in crisis, including employers dealing with FMLA — there are so many opportunities for improvement, if you can hold space for all those perspectives in the design process. It can be hard for me to be a patient, let alone a patient patient, in a system that is designed to fail everyone but shareholders.
I would love to change the system, but in the moment, this is the best I can do: Stay chill. Be patient with the providers and insurance reps who find this just as frustrating as I do, even more. Take good notes. And, perhaps most importantly, share them, so that others can be more fully empowered to navigate this broken system.
I hope this is helpful to someone out there — good luck.

Insurtech and the Digital Transformation in the Insurance Industry

Insurance has remained fundamentally unchanged for centuries. It has been described as one of the least trusted industry sectors with the lowest level of user satisfaction. Accordingly, to Daniel Schreiber, Lemonade CEO, the cause of this consumer unfriendliness is in the traditional structure of insurance: every dollar insurance company pays for their customers is directly taken away from their profits, which makes insurance company’s interest directly contrary to its customer’s interest.
Insurance Technology (InsurTech) pioneers are working towards an ecosystem in which insurance could be sold entirely online without using any insurance brokers, AI is able to calculate insurance policy rates without human error, customers are able to get insured within seconds and claims paid in minutes. If this was to be achieved profits generated from unpaid claims previously directed to the insurance company, could now be paid to the customer’s chosen common good.
Practical examples can already be found in the market that mirror the core functions of digital finance platforms. User onboarding, data collection, integrated payments and decision making are being utilised by such InsurTech incumbents as Snapsheet, who recently closed series C funding to further expand their offering. Snapsheet helps to give transparency to the automotive insurance claims process and also simplify the payment process between all parties involved.
The insurance industry is claimed to be more complex when compared to financial services, regardless if the statement is true we can begin to see parallels emerging.
Originally published at news.crowdvalley.com. You can read the full story here: http://news.crowdvalley.com/news/digital-transformation-in-the-insurance-industry

Health Insurance Industry, Big Pharmaceuticals Launch Michael Moore Smear Campaign
In his new movie SiCKO, documentary filmmaker Michael Moore exposes the deplorable practices of the major health insurance and pharmaceutical companies in working to deny coverage to individuals who are insured. As Moore told ABC’s Nightline:
There’s no getting around the fact that people are dying in this country as a result of the decisions that get made by these health insurance companies. People are dying in this country because they can’t afford the pharmaceuticals because of the price gauging that takes place.
For his damaging expos© of the health care industry, Moore is now under attack from front groups supported and funded by the insurance and pharmaceutical industries. The New York Sun reports:
The pharmaceutical industry and think tanks it backs financially are readying a multifaceted counteroffensive against Michael Moore’s film about the health care industry. […]
The drug companies and their allies have been on their toes ever since the movie was being filmed, when they warned personnel to watch out for film crews from the “Fahrenheit 9/11” director. But in advance of the film’s release, they are upping the volume and the tempo of their activities.
Armed with the plenty of cash from the health care industry, these organizations are lobbing personal insults against Moore and propagating the message of those invested in maintaining the status quo. Some examples:
FreedomWorks: FreedomWorks has launched a new campaign claiming that policies favored by Moore, “healthy individuals” would “wind up subsidizing people like Moore, who are overweight and and/or live decidedly unhealthy lifestyles by frequenting fast-food restaurants, smoke, or use drugs.” FreedomWorks is run by former House Majority Leader Dick Armey, whose PAC has received significant contributions from the health care industry. Several industry members serve on its board of directors. Additionally, it has a deal with Medical Savings Insurance Co. allowing the company’s brokers “sell high-deductible insurance policies and tax-free savings plans at a group discount to buyers who join the conservative political organization.”
CATO Institute: CATO receives funding from multiple insurance and pharmaceutical companies, including Amerisure Insurance, Pfizer, and Merck. It has written numerous pieces attacking Moore’s film, arguing that he “ignores the positive side of American health care” and instead “focuses on life expectancy.” It held an event after the DC premiere of the film, screening conservative films that “highlight problems” with “government-run health care.”
Manhattan Institute: The Manhattan Institute receives funding from multiple pharmaceutical giants such as Bristol-Myers Squibb. One of its senior fellows started a site called Free Market Cure, which argues SiCKO is “set to inject a large dose of misinformation and propaganda into our national dialog about health care policy.” The group is advising reporters covering SiCKO that scholars “at the institute’s Center for Medical Progress…were available to comment on the health care industry.”
Other health-care industry front groups — such as the Galen Institute, Pacific Research Institute, and the Heritage Foundation — have recently launched their own attacks on Moore’s film.
For the health insurance and pharmaceutical industries, Michael Moore’s film exposing their history and their misdeeds is a serious threat, and they have no shortage of funds to try to distort it.

The emergence of “engagement insurance” and the developing social conscience of protection insurance
By Rick Huckstep
Imagine a world where a consumer has an ongoing daily engagement with their insurance brand. Where insurance is a value add service that offers more than just protection against an unwelcome event. Where the insurance brand is discussed openly, positively and frequently in the office, at the pub, in the coffee shop (sic!).
Imagine a world where policyholders chose their insurer for the value add more than the cover itself. Where the premium is not the single determining factor for buying the insurance. Where the insurance brand becomes “sticky” and renews without thought year after year.
This is the world of insurance protection where consumers (policyholders) buy their insurance cover because of what they get with it, more than what they get in it. And this world is entirely possible, plausible and closer than you think!
To quote Maria Ferrante-Schepis in Flirting with the Uninterested, “You must give people a REASON to pay more for something” and “Insurance companies, when you really think about it, are not just in the protection business. They are in the “lifestyle continuity business””.
This is what I like to call “engagement insurance”.

Today, insurers like Vitality and Oscar have developed a model where they encourage ongoing engagement with their customers. I see this first hand with some business colleagues of mine who are Vitality customers. These are two men, in there twenties, millenials by any definition, who are mobile, digital, active.
On a regular basis I sit with them over a coffee and listen to them compare notes and talk about the free coffee or cinema tickets that Vitality have sent them for achieving an activity goal. They don’t discuss the insurance cover or even the premium, but they do discuss the Vitality rewards they get for doing what they do.
What they value the most is the engagement they have with their insurer. And this is fascinating to me because (and I am a big fan of Vitality) the actual benefits and incentives on offer are very limited.
Vitality have made their insurance product “sticky”?
“Sticky” is the Holy Grail for any sales organizations regardless of their industry, market or product. It defines the experience of the buyer once they have bought the product or service. It means once the purchase has been made, the buyer “sticks” with it through their own choice. It means that price is no longer the primary determining factor when making a buying decision!
But there is another and very significant consequence of this emerging model of “engagement insurance”.
The consequence is social in its nature and benefits more than just the policyholder and insurer alike, and not just because it leads to a better premium or combined ratio.
In the long term, the social consequence could be profound and seen in safer roads, healthier lifestyles and a greater sense of social responsibility.
Telematics and smartphone apps are being used to encourage and reward safer driving through the conditions and pricing of the motor insurance policy. Ingenie set the market direction when they positioned the black box from ‘big brother’ to ‘co-pilot’.
Conclusive research shows how healthier lifestyles lead to a lower cost on already over-stretched health services, to great productivity in the workforce, and enhanced standards of living. The adoption of wearable tech is already showing us that insurance can play a huge role in improving health and lifestyles.
Moral hazard is the elephant in the room for insurance. The emergence of social, P2P and friendship groups (or the return to mutual insurance?) will change attitudes towards claiming on insurance. Will we ever see again the tabloid headline of a fraudster boasting on a Spanish beach of how they will pay for their holiday through an insurance claim?
To give me a startup’s perspective on the social benefits of ‘engagement insurance’, this week I interviewed Hesus Inoma, the founder of Irish digital startup, WeSavvy. Having grown up in Lisbon for 14 years, Hesus moved to Ireland to study International Insurance and European Studies at the University of Limerick.

Very quickly it became clear that Hesus is motivated by the social agenda for his insurance start-up. “I want this to be a lifestyle product”, he explained. “We’re starting with the health and life market and using wearables tech to give customer full control over their insurance premium. We want to create a no-claims bonus for health insurance that you can take with you if you change insurer.”
Like all distribution start-ups, Hesus’ value proposition for the insurance carrier is a simple one…by encouraging, motivating and rewarding greater levels of activity amongst policyholders, claims ratios are improved and everybody wins.
But there is a Part 2 to the value proposition. This insurance model builds loyalty and “stickiness”. This works because consumers and insurers only connect when the consumer buys the policy or makes a claim against it.
There is no way for an insurer to build brand value and customer loyalty in the current retail model, unless there is a claim and the policyholder gets the response they want. With WeSavvy, they aim to create an ongoing engagement where the policyholder gets continuous feedback from their platform that in turn creates engagement, which leads to brand loyalty.

Hesus is also embarking on an ambitious plan to create an industry wide benchmark for insurance premiums. He calls it “crowdsourcing your quote” and the concept is simple.
Using a network effect, WeSavvy is building a database of protection insurance quotes and premiums. Using a profiling system, WeSavvy will group similar or same quotes together. Once they hit scale, WeSavvy will be able to offer an industry price benchmark and baseline for normalizing insurance premiums.
However, the initial phase for WeSavvy is in the life and health space with a cash back proposition based on activity level, “its like Oscar… on Steroids!”
WeSavvy are regulated by the Central Bank of Ireland with the ability to passport its services across 9 European countries and begin beta testing this month with a medical cash plan.
Hesus has been supported by the Irish enterprise program, New Frontiers Phase 2, which is

based in Synergy Centre Tallaght in Dublin. This is a state funded program and Hesus is busy preparing for his investor pitch in the coming months as well as going live in the meantime! Next week, Hesus takes WeSavvy to the Deloitte Digital Disruptors’ insurance bootcamp in Lisbon. This is a startup acceleration program run by Deloitte Portugal focused on digital solutions to disrupt the European insurance industry.
What is clear to me when talking to Hesus and other InsuranceTech startups in the retail distribution space is that engagement is a core value of their proposition. And the social benefits that spin out of this “engagement insurance” model have the potential to be massive.
This article was first published at www.dailyfintech.com on 15th October 2015. Daily Fintech Advisers provide strategic consulting to organisations with business and investment interests in Fintech.
Like this:
Like Loading…
Related
Originally published at dailyfintech.com on October 15, 2015.


FinTech insurance firm Worry+Peace going tandem in style with cycle clothing brand Paria

Exciting and bold collaboration for new ecommerce store and premium cycling brand to promote new cycle insurance product
September 15th, 2015: FinTech insurance disruptor Worry +Peace is celebrating the launch of its new own-branded cycle insurance product, with a new campaign involving Paria — the freshest urban cycle brand on the block.
The initiative is part of Worry + Peace’s“X” series of invite-only collaborations with some of the most cutting-edge and challenging lifestyle brands and startups.
This first alliance sees Worry+Peace and Paria pairing up to design several cycling apparel designs. The winning collection will be voted for by the public via social media — with entrants getting the chance to win a cycling jersey for their input.
Want to vote?
Simply tweet Worry + Peace, changing “X” with your preferred number:
“@worryandpeace @pariacc #NoXWPxParia” (103 characters.)
“We’re all about lifestyle, so this collaboration to develop our creative mantra with other inspiring brands is really exciting,” says Worry+Peace founder, James York. “Paria are a fresh and confident challenger brand in the growing urban cycling market — and we relate to that!”
The collaboration will see a Worry+Peace “team” jersey designed by Paria made available for competition prizes and a limited run on the Paria site.
An initial cluster of designs has been created, but the choice is open to the public. With the winning design being picked by social media votes — you’re a tweet away from entering. Those that vote will get a chance to win one of the limited edition items.
“When you hear the word ‘insurance’, you usually cringe, flinch or wince. Or unwittingly do all three at once,” says Paria’s Sam Morgan. “Weirdly, that wasn’t the case here. Worry+Peace told us about their mission and we saw a great brand fit. We’re all about challenging the way things are, so are they.”
The winning designs will also form part of an engagement strategy to gather stories from avid cyclists across the UK. “We just want to see all those lovely amateur riders donning some awesome Paria gear, with a dash of Worry+Peace style on it… Should be fun,” adds York.

Insurance Technology Startup Landscape Trends and Insights — Q1 2017
Here is our Q1 2017 summary report on the Insurance Technology (insurtech) startup sector. The following report includes a startup landscape overview, graphical trends and insights, and recent funding and exit events.

We are currently tracking 1,050 Insurance Technology companies in 14 categories across 54 countries, with a total of $17 Billion in funding. Click here to learn more about the full Insurance Technology landscape report and database.

Glad to see I am not the only one warning her about the high cost of insurance and care as you get older. You put it more succinctly than I did.
I hate that this affects so many of us!

GEICO Launches Innovation Challenge: How would you promote renters insurance to Millennials?

Placing a high value on life experiences in their 20s and often graduating in debt, many Millennials postpone traditionally “adult” events to their 30s. Milestones such as getting a car, settling down, and buying a house have been delayed a decade while renting has become more of the norm. Although the majority of this generation chooses to rent, many do not fully understand or take advantage of renters insurance. As Millennials move out on their own and decide to rent an apartment in the city or a house in the suburbs, we want to figure out the best way to educate them on renters insurance and encourage them to utilize this valuable coverage before the other landmark events of adulthood begin. Please read this article to learn helpful information about trends in Millennial renting and renters insurance.
MindSumo hosts challenges for GEICO and over 250 other companies to help generate unique ideas and insights from a community of over 300K US college students.
Learn more about how we can help you, and what we’ve done for other clients.

How Aviva Innovated B2B Insurance for Modern Small Businesses

Dr. Nick Coates, C Space VP, was awarded the prestigious AQR Prosper Riley-Smith Qualitative Excellence Award at the 2015 Market Research Society Awards for his work with Aviva.
Click here to read the full case study about how Aviva innovated their B2B insurance offering.
When we think of “small business,” the first image that comes to mind for many of us is the local mom-and-pop shop — you know, the one with a credit card swiper on the counter and ads on the local radio station that nobody listens to.
But change has been brewing for small biz. In the last 10 years, thanks in large part to a rebounding global economy, the Internet, and ubiquitous technology, small business has undergone a big transformation. Consequently, the small business owner has changed drastically. Now an entrepreneur with an MBA in finance can leave his 9 to 5, get funded on Kickstarter, accept digital payments via Square and PayPal, market on Twitter and Facebook, and grow to become a major supplier to Amazon.
This is disintermediation in living color — and, a few years ago, it began to creep into B2B insurance. Small business owners were starting to behave like empowered shoppers, comparing options, scrutinizing purchases, and demanding customized insurance plans tailored to their specific business needs. .
Some insurers viewed disintermediation as a threat. Not improving their B2B offering meant the potential risk of losing share to competitors. But others saw it as opportunity. If the right changes were made to update B2B insurance, growth and leadership in the SME market, especially in the broker space, could result.
One insurance company that found a solution to the challenge: Aviva, the UK’s largest insurance provider.
C Space and Aviva worked together to develop an innovation process that started with a broad question and ended with refined product and service concepts ready for market. It all hinged on gaining a holistic understanding of the modern small business owner.
Critically, the innovation work uncovered the human stories that led to a key insight: small isn’t simple.
Small businesses have specific, highly complex insurance needs. For example, a sole proprietor electrician whose main job is to change lightbulbs struggled to get insurance coverage because one of his clients was a nuclear power station. When your business operates near high-grade uranium, getting insurance suddenly becomes a lot more complex.
Stories such as this brought the realities and pain points of SME owners to life for Aviva stakeholders and brokers, too — both within the context of the small business world and outside of it. Customer narratives were shared across Aviva to inspire employees to tangibly see, feel, and internalize the end customer. The work created buy-in, provoked change, and instilled empathy for small business owners.
Today, Aviva leads the market for SME broker solutions. “The deep insight that we now have into what makes our customers tick and what keeps them up at night has set us apart from our competition,” says Anna King, SME E-trading Propositions Business Manager.
A redesigned experience of Aviva’s now award-winning broker trading platform has increased insurance quotes and conversion rates significantly. The company has also launched a complementary revenue stream: a mobile-ready product that gives small business owners anytime, anywhere access to fast, flexible insurance options without the need to involve intermediaries.
Innovation work with C Space “has been at the heart of our SME commercial developments for the past couple of years,” says Aviva Customer Solutions Director, Ian Ferguson, “It has helped drive us on our journey to being a properly customer-first company.”
As a testament to the success of customer-inspired innovation, Aviva now has a focus called ”Customer” in its commercial business unit, ensuring the end customer is at the heart of every decision and action.
Originally published at www.cspace.com on January 21, 2016.

Cybersecurity Insurance as Risk Management
www.getcujo.com
The Department of Homeland Security says that cybersecurity insurance is:
…designed to mitigate losses from a variety of cyber incidents, including data breaches, business interruption, and network damage. A robust cybersecurity insurance market could help reduce the number of successful cyber attacks by: (1) promoting the adoption of preventative measures in return for more coverage; and (2) encouraging the implementation of best practices by basing premiums on an insured’s level of self-protection.
They also note that a lot of companies out of cybersecurity insurance because of its costs, lack of clarity about what it might actually cover, and the conviction that their organization is not going to be a target for a cyber attack.
Is it actually wise for firms of small to large sizes to opt out of cybersecurity insurance? Is it realistic to believe that any company is immune to such threats or has no appeal or interest to cyber criminals? Let’s consider this…
Cybersecurity Insurance as Risk Management
In all reality, risks exist for every firm in the world. Whether you are the small shoe repair firm in a small town in the middle of nowhere or the major corporation in a large city, your financial records, personal data and other business details may be of value to many. Thus, as a form of risk management, it is worth considering the value of cybersecurity insurance.
After all, it mitigates some of the financial harm that might result from a cyber attack. For instance, you keep your client’s names and information in a database, you have financial information on your computer network, and you have your own company data on the same system. A cyber attack might compromise all of this information, and lawsuits may be the least of your worries.
However, cybersecurity insurance comes in different flavors and if you have first party insurance, it will cover the interruption to the business, damage to the reputation, and some digital assets. Third-party coverage addresses more complex matters like credit monitoring of your clients, legal fees, fines, and more.
One way to consider cybersecurity insurance, then is as one expert said: “identify and secure the company’s digital crown jewels, then quantify and insure the remaining risk.”
Cybersecurity Insurance Flaws
Though we know that cybersecurity insurance can address issues like your business reputation in the event of a digital loss or attack, many agree that it is but one area of insurance that is a bit weaker than others. For many, the coverage is not adequate where reputational damage, intellectual property, and a loss of business is concerned.
After all, a security breach can easily mean that your reputation becomes one of cutting corners and failing to put the client’s best interests first. It could paint you as irresponsible and incapable of understanding modern technologies. Few insurance policies can provide mean of measuring such losses, and creating compensation for them.
Cybersecurity Insurance as a Means to Improvements
Of course, one thing that insurances for cybersecurity make plain is that there still exists the need for security against such threats. Simply underwriting a massive policy to compensate your clients and your business is not good policy. The information that is lost to hackers can be remarkable, and a hacker may not only steal information. They might use your system for illegal purposes, aligning you to some of the world’s worst crimes. They could hijack or ransom data, costing you huge sums of money to regain access to files.
Thus, insurance is a way of offsetting some financial losses, but it is not thesolution to security risks. It is, though, a good inspiration to millions of firms to take that advice provided above — to secure the most important areas to the greatest extents possible, but also continue securing them with ever-advancing technologies and tactics.
Let’s just consider one of the most famous cybersecurity blunders of all time — the Sony Entertainment hack. This attack exposed business information, customer and worker data, and thousands of internal communications that ruined professional relationships and humiliated some of the biggest names in the industry. Everything from nude photos to celebrity earnings appeared in tabloids after this occurred, and insurances of any kind would be able to undo or repair many of the damages.
This is why insurance can be seen as the means to great improvement, yet it cannot be the end itself. Consider this comment:
…cyber insurance forces executives and boards to pay attention to the need to protect IT assets against threat actors by focusing on not only procuring cyber insurance, but also investing in effective security programs, and continually monitoring their IT networks to identify potential anomalies early on to prevent network wide problem… some organizations, especially small-to-midsize businesses (SMBs), will gain a false sense of security from cyber insurance and fail to implement the technology, process, and training components essential to a comprehensive cyber security program.
What this tells us is that, strategically, the insurance can prove beneficial to companies that have outstanding risk once all possible security methods are in place. Just as the employer who has worker’s compensation insurance in place would not ignore the safety of the workplace, the companies with cybersecurity insurances must not let their guards down.
And nowhere is this easier done than with embedded objects. You can be at home or in an office, and create a very secure router, entirely up to date computers and tablets, and yet leave your network open to hackers and cyber attacks through the use of embedded devices such as anything wireless that accesses the router, smart devices that are internet connected, and even some web or security cameras. Hackers seek attack platforms, and you might be astonished at how many there are.
Integrating a gateway device into your systems is one sure-fire way of vastly reducing cyber attack threats. CUJO, as an example, is a gateway that integrates with all embedded or network devices, knowing what they should and should not do, understanding immediately if an attack is attempted, and then thwarting it. Don’t just throw money at the problem of cyber threats, consider designing a full solution that blunts any hacker’s efforts.
www.getcujo.com

Ahaha, we often joke about who has the better life insurance policy, but I could never get rid of this guy in a million years. He just made me watch these two videos in rapid succession.


Yeah. You might be right about the soul mate thing.

Insurance-Engineering Blockchain Consortium

The Insurance and Engineering Industries Team Up To Study Potential Blockchain Applications.
The value of new construction in the US is nearly 1.4 Trillion Dollars. A complex web of contracts underwritten by insurance carriers and financial institutions spread across the US economic system manage this activity.
The goal of the Insurance Engineering Blockchain Consortium is to understand how blockchain technology and smart contracts can serve the construction, infrastructure, and associated insurance industries upon which society depends.
The work of the Consortium is based on several whitepapers published by the FinTech Task force for the National Society of Professional Engineers (NSPE) and the Quarterly Letter of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, Center for Insurance Policy and Research (NAIC/CIPR).
Co-Founder Daniel Robles, PE states:
“There may be an extraordinary opportunity for professional engineers to work closely with the insurance industry and financial institutions as the decentralized adjudication force to assure smart contracts in real work environments. The result would be increased process efficiency, fault-tolerance, enhanced valuation of assets and reduced risk exposures”
The IEBC is currently accepting founding firms in the Insurance, banking, and infrastructure industries to help lay out the research and development agenda for the coming year.
For information on joining the IEBC or to schedule an interview, please visit http://iebc.co or email info@iebc.co

Nace Mundi Lab, aceleradora de startups para el ámbito Insurance&Tec

Las startups puedan inscribirse hasta el 22 de noviembre.
Las startups puedan inscribirse hasta el 22 de noviembre.
La segunda fase consistirá en un programa piloto con Munich Re, quien seleccionará a las empresas con mayor proyección para el sector y les conectará con clientes.
16/11/2015 |. Sergio Gómez Rosillo
Mundi Lab, un programa de aceleración de startups que selecciona a las 10 iniciativas con mayor potencial de innovación en los ámbitos tecnológicos (Big Data, Digital Insurance, Internet of Things, E-Health, data analytics, wearables, lifestyle programs, mobile, etc.) ha nacido con el objetivo de crear un sistema de innovación en este sector. Este programa se desarrolla en dos fases: una primera de formación y otra segunda fase en la que las empresas desarrollan y validan sus proyectos para irrumpir en el mercado.
La primera edición comenzará a finales de febrero del próximo año, y ya está abierto el plazo para que las startups puedan inscribirse durante las próximas dos semanas, hasta el 22 de noviembre en su página web. La primera fase, que no implica la cesión de equity y no tiene coste inicial para las participantes, se desarrollará en Madrid durante cinco semanas.
Las empresas seleccionadas podrán acelerar sus proyectos teniendo acceso a workshops para perfeccionar sus herramientas empresariales, así como podrán hacer networking con agentes de la industria y el ecosistema emprendedor. Contarán con asesoramiento de expertos del sector, y con un espacio de trabajo para potenciar sus actividades. Tras la fase del programa de cinco semanas, participarán en un International Demo Day que les dará acceso a clientes interesados en startups que ofrezcan soluciones tecnológicas enfocadas al sector.
La segunda fase consistirá en un programa piloto con Munich Re, quien seleccionará a las empresas con mayor proyección para el sector y les conectará con clientes. Esta etapa tendrá una duración de 12 meses y permitirá a las startups desarrollar sus ideas, demostrar la eficacia de sus soluciones y agilizar la penetración e implantación en el mercado.

Climate Insurance in a Changing World
How might we protect against the far-reaching impacts of extreme weather, changing temperatures, sea level rise, and other phenomena that affect everyone, even when no single cause can be identified?
Dauphin Island, Alabama. Credit: David Helvarg, Blue Frontier Campaign/Marine Photobank
Insurance is an element prevalent in every aspect of our lives — a massive global industry that exists to protect us against risk, accident, personal circumstance — against almost every manifestation of human endeavor where there is an opportunity to use an insurance scheme to protect us financially against loss.
In some cases, such as car ownership or business liability, insurance is required by law. There is fire insurance, property and theft insurance, unemployment insurance, mortgage insurance, bankruptcy insurance, crop insurance, flood insurance, marine insurance, and many more such specific coverage types that are financed by premiums paid by individuals and corporations into a collective pool from which claims, as they arise, can be paid. In the meantime, the insurance companies use the aggregated monies for investments, marketing, and dividends to their shareholders. It is a lucrative business, and is often re-insured — that is, company claims covered by yet another company that protects for another premium, against corporate loss.
As we consider the threats we face in our changing world, insurance might be a hopeful tool or discipline to protect and compensate for events not heretofore covered but potentially devastating to us all — the impact of which extends beyond that of specific events and massive financial and social disruption.
Bangladesh tops the Global Climate Risk Index. A study conducted by the water resources ministry forecasts a considerable portion of today’s Bangladesh will be inundated. Credit: Mohammad Rakibul Hasan/Marine Photobank.
The effects of climate change are being felt everywhere on earth, and nowhere more destructively than in the most vulnerable communities where development and poverty are at the highest. So what about climate insurance? How might we protect against the far-reaching impacts of extreme weather, changing temperatures, sea level rise, and other phenomena that affect everyone even when no single cause can be identified, no accountability possible? If these are defined as acts of God then insurance does not apply. But if these are defined as the result of collective actions, by many entities in many places, how is it possible to insure against the predictable economic consequence and critical social detriment?
The Munich Climate Insurance Initiative (MCII) is a response to the growing realization that insurance-related solutions can play a role in adaptation to climate change, as advocated in the UN Framework Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. The initiative provides a forum for insurance-related expertise on climate change impacts. The Initiative also brings together insurers, experts on climate change and adaptation, NGOs and researchers intent on finding effective and fair solutions to the risks posed by climate change, as well as sustainable approaches that create incentive structures for risk and poverty reduction. The Munich Initiative is hosted by the United Nations University Institute for Environment and Human Security and issued its first report in October 2016.
As with all insurance policies, the language is complicated, but the report is based on seven principles that represent a clear bias toward the needs of the poor and a real intent to address comprehensive need-based solutions, reliable coverage, affordability, accessibility and participation through practical programs and associations, transparency and accountability, sustainability over the longer term, and enabling the environment through capacity, literacy, regulation, partnerships, and technology.
Unsplash, Tulen Travel, Budva Municipality, Montenegro
The possible role of insurance represents a positive and optimistic step forward through the adaptation of a conventional tool for risk management to serve those most vulnerable. It is an alternative to the sequential, one-time disaster financing we have seen in the aftermath of tsunami or typhoon or other sudden and new examples of climate-related destructive events. Will insurance find a new and useful form and application? Will it be financed adequately and responsibly to provide the amounts and continuity of funds surely to be required? Will it be supported by other government programs or private financing schemes that will address the roots causes of poverty in the context of rapidly changing environmental circumstance? Will it lead us to adapt and mitigate climate change otherwise by new values, systems, and behaviors? These are big questions; how do insure they are answered?
Peter Neill is founder and director of the World Ocean Observatory, a web-based place of exchange for information and educational services about the health of the world ocean. Online at worldoceanobservatory.org.

Lloyd’s Wants To Revolutionize The Insurance Sector With Blockchain Technology
Ever since banks and other financial institutions around the world have started to show an interest in blockchain technology, the Bitcoin community has been speculating on what projects might entail from this interest. In the case of Lloyd’s, one of London Market’s key players, there seems to be a keen interest in using blockchain technology to revolutionize insurance markets as we know them.
Insurance Sector is Ripe For The Picking

The financial sector has seen little to no innovation over the past fifty years, and the lack of thinking ahead is clearly showing as of late. In fact, hardly anyone can make sense of the financial system we use today, not even the people who are actively working in the sector on a daily basis.
Insurance is one of those odd creatures that exist in the financial world. While the principle of issuing insurance is clear as day to anyone in the world, it remains a bit of a mystery as how these deals are enforced. One thing’s for sure though, the administrative costs associated with insurances have skyrocketed, and things will need to change sooner rather than later.
This is where blockchain technology can play a key role in the process, or at least, that is what Lloyd’s seems to think. While reducing the cost of insurances will be decreased by quite a margin, blockchain technology will also provide improved data access for all parties involved. Streamlining complicated processes is beneficial for our society and blockchain technology will be the driving factor to achieve this goal.
But there are more benefits to implementing blockchain technology than just cost-cutting measures and increased data access. An increase in risk-recording abilities, providing additional transparency, improved accuracy, and most importantly, an increase in speed, are all features the insurance sector drastically needs.
Another major advantage of using blockchain technology in the financial sector comes in the form of securely sharing and logging any type of document. Implications can range from insurance documents to authentication documents. Also, financial institutions would be able to issue their own token(s) on top of the existing blockchain to track assets.
Putting An End To The Paper Trail With Blockchain Technology

One thing most people might overlook is the sheer amount of paperwork associated with the current financial system. Creating a bank account, obtaining insurance, receiving a credit card bill; all of these mundane things require a hefty amount of paperwork. Blockchain technology can eliminate the need for any paperwork.
More and more consumers are slowly starting to embrace their digital lifestyle, although there are very few financial aspects available in a digital form. Revamping this entire industry will not happen overnight and Lloyd’s plans mention how they plan to do things step by step over the next five years.
Whether or not this move by Lloyd’s will be a successful one, remains to be seen. It is not the first time people have tried to streamline the insurance process by bringing in new technologies or ideas, and none of the previous attempts has been successful. However, the world has never seen anything like blockchain technology either.
Source: Lloyd’s
Images courtesy of Shutterstock, Lloyd’s
Originally published at Digital Money Times.

How Zurich Insurance Grew a Complex Global Business with High-Value Customers

Click here to read the full case study about how Zurich Insurance grew its Global Life Insurance offering.
Insurance is a complicated, highly established, technical industry that’s too often overly reliant on legacy systems and processes. Change comes slow, especially when what worked so well in the past is hardcoded into the DNA of industry and company culture.
But, to borrow a phrase from Bob Dylan, the times they are a-changin’. Today, customers — life insurance customers in particular — are empowered, worldly, and have more choice, literally, at their fingertips than ever before. Their rapid adoption of mobile technology is fueling the multi-billion dollar rise of largely unregulated fintech start-ups, which, collectively, pose a threat to the market share of global insurance companies.
Traditional insurers can no longer rely on the status quo to grow. So evolve they must. Of course, that’s hard to do, but if they wish to prosper they have little other choice.
To keep ahead, insurers need to substantively transform their global offerings. They must find ways to fit products and services more seamlessly into the lives of customers. Doing so requires listening closely to end customers, re-engineering the business around and with them, and bringing global customers to life to inspire insurance stakeholders to act, fast. It starts with the lifeblood of every company: customers.
Zurich Insurance, one of the world’s oldest and largest insurance companies, recognized the urgent need to evolve, to reconcile legacy with change. Armed with a new customer-focused mandate, Zurich wanted to better understand its global life insurance customers, an important part of the company’s USD $70 billion in revenue. These customers were primarily affluent and in certain markets predominantly ex-pats, relocating to a new city every few years. Reaching and continuously engaging with them would be difficult.
So the Zurich Global Life Insight team partnered with C Space, together piloting an online community of existing and prospective life insurance customers in Hong Kong. The community was designed to gain a comprehensive, real-time understanding of these people, and to develop insurance products and services directly with them.
Insurance, however, is not exactly a “sexy” topic. What’s more, how do you motivate such a nomadic and time-strapped audience to care about your company so much that they will take time out of their busy day to help you?
From this work with difficult-to-reach (and even more difficult-to-engage-with) customers, Zurich Global Life has today gained deep, targeted insight and a more nuanced understanding of customers’ differing regional perspectives.
Customers’ input and ideas for evolving Zurich Global Life to better serve its global clientele have created significant business impact. In Singapore, Zurich co-created, co-designed, and even named an award-winning product that has already generated more than USD $4 million in new business value.
Customers have also permeated Zurich’s culture, leading a transformation essential to the company’s continued prosperity. Customers’ voices and ideas reach hundreds of Zurich employees and senior executives, including the CEO. As says Simon Carpenter, Head of Customer Insight & Experience, Zurich Global Life, work with global customers has become “the centerpiece of, and a key driver in, Zurich Global Life’s journey to become the most customer-focused life insurer in the world.”
Originally published at www.cspace.com on January 21, 2016.


The House Always Wins — Casinos and Insurance Companies
Buying insurance is a little like playing at a casino, in that overall the house always wins.
Sure, there are individuals who end up walking away with more money than they put in. In casinos, they are called winners. If they keep playing, they are bound to end up losers eventually.
Casinos know mathematically how often their slot machines can pay out, what odds they can pay on games of chance, and when their blackjack dealers need to take another card in order to win enough money from the masses to pay for their rent, their electricity, the salaries of their workers, all their overhead, and still end up with a profit at the end of the day. It works because the greater the number of gambling transactions, the more accurate the actual outcome will match the mathematical predictions of probability. If I flip a coin ten times, I may get heads 7 times and it’s not that unusual. If I flip a coin a million times, the chances of getting heads 700,000 times instead of 500,000 is close to nil.
Similarly, insurance companies use the power of actuaries to set premiums. The premium they calculate for every individual is one which pays for the companies’ advertising, pays for their overhead, pays all their workers’ salaries, and often creates profit, in addition to paying for the claims.
I believe that means that if I were to create a personal account and pay into it the premiums quoted to me by insurance companies for my health, my home, or my life, according to statistics I would have a better than even chance of being able to afford all my bills and maybe even come out ahead. I would probably have to invest my money, rather than just have it in a savings account; insurance companies probably earn interest or income on their cash balances, so I would have to as well for the premium to be accurate.
The problem with being an individual is that statistics are not an accurate predictor of what will happen to me, because the sample pool isn’t large enough. So there’s more risk for me playing the odds alone than for a million people to pool their money and to play the odds together. There’s a good chance I’ll come out ahead if I invest my money rather than giving it to an insurance company, yet I am risking a catastrophic loss.
Playing at a casino, I’m almost guaranteed to lose money (unless I’m a very good poker player — the house and I can both win there); if I’m lucky, I can win big. If I buy insurance, I’m almost guaranteed to lose money; if I’m unlucky, I can get reimbursed for losses. Sometimes it’s worth it — playing at casinos is entertainment, win or lose, and buying insurance is peace of mind, win or lose. The house always wins overall, though.

Applying Lean Startup to Health Insurance
Before you ask what startups have to do with large, over-regulated and bureaucratic insurance firms, perhaps a definition of startup, is required.
What is a startup?
A startup, as defined by Steve Blank, the father of the lean startup movement, is characterized as a temporary organization designed to search for a repeatable and scalable business model. That’s it.
It makes no difference whether the startup is a two-bit operation working out of a café or whether it is a well-funded project at a global enterprise, if its primary purpose is to find product market fit, then it is a startup.
And startups by nature are risky business.
According to Deloitte, almost 96% of startups fail to scale.
Even venture capitalists, what with their years of plowing through countless term sheets and sitting through countless pitches, only ever return investor’s capital inone out of four investments (notice how I said return on investment — this isn’t remotely close to striking gold).
So, why do most startups fail?
According to Eric Ries, the critically acclaimed author of The Lean Startup, it’s got nothing to do with whether the product works or not.
Usually, it’s because startups build products that they think people will want andwaste all of their resources perfecting their product before showing it to customers… who don’t want to buy it.
The startups that succeed tend to be those that manage to make enough changes to their product, based on continuous customer feedback (or validated learning) before they run out of resources.
This is also known as emergent strategy and is the essence of the lean startup movement, which over the past five years ago has been shaking up the way that both emerging startups and established industry incumbents, such as GE, go about developing new products.
What does the lean startup look like?
Essentially, the lean startup process looks a little like this:
Map out your business model;
Define the key make or break assumptions underlying your business model;
Build a virtual prototype or minimum feature prototype designed to test these assumptions;
Get out of the building and put the prototypes in the hands of real people and get real feedback based on what customers actually do and unlike focus groups, not just what they say they do;
Capture the right metrics and measure against a pre-defined metric of success, aiming to validate and invalidate assumptions as quickly as possible;
Based on the validated learnings, make product changes and iterate towards that metric of success and product market fit; and
At some point, teams employing this model will either be onto a winner, make an adjustment to their business model (aka pivot), or call it a day and do something entirely different.
Why should health insurers care?
If any industry is in need of applying emergent strategy to its product development methods, it’s health insurance.
The health insurance industry is facing significant disruption on a number of fronts, such as but not limited to:
Okay, okay, so how do we go about applying lean startup methodology to a highly regulated, bureaucratic insurance industry incumbent then?
Highly regulated indeed. In Australia, health insurance products need to be cleared by the regulator, the Private Health Insurance Administration Council (PHIAC), before going to market.
Not only that, but policy prices can only be changed once a year on April 1.
So given these nuances, how does an insurer go about getting out of the building and testing their assumptions with real people and real customers?
Applying lean startup to health insurance product development
I recently met with a number of insurance industry innovation leads to find out if and how they went about applying the lean startup philosophy to their product development pipeline.
One such company has successfully used lean startup principles to develop a winning product.
So, how did they do it?
Well, once they had mapped out their initial business model and defined the key assumptions underlying this specific product, they decided that they would tap into the wealth of customer opinions at their fingertips…the 5,000+ employees in the building.
Insurance company employees need health insurance too and the demographics across the building vary considerably.
Yes, I know I said get out of the building, but that was purely figurative!
The company installed both iPads and posters across the building which aimed to engage employees passing by and gather initial feedback on product features.
On a daily and weekly basis, different product features would be tested, essentially a form of A/B testing, or split testing (a method used by lean startups to determine which product variables perform better).
Once the results were in, the product development team refined their initial product based on these new learnings and then decided to physically get out of the building.
In plain clothes, on a busy street in Melbourne’s central business district, the product development team used iPads and aimed to see if any passer-byers would want to buy the product. Now, getting passer-byers to stop and engage with you on a busy Melbourne street is no mean feat at the best of times, as many a charity fundraiser will attest to, but the team managed to speak to quite a few people and was ultimately successful in ‘selling’ the product, without finalizing any sales of course.
This helped to provide more comfort that they were onto a winner.
The Buffer Case Study
The unsuspecting test case was readily told that the product wasn’t actually available yet. One successful web startup that employed this very strategy is email marketing platform Buffer.
The Buffer team essentially tested demand for their product with a website widget that asked customers who had read all about the product features to ‘buy now’. Those that were ready to open their wallets were readily told that the product wasn’t ready quite yet but that they would be placed on a mailing list. This gave the Buffer team some comfort before they spent resources developing their product, today worth more than an estimated US$50 million.
Lean Startup in the 1950s
This concept of emergent strategy, or stretching your resources until you stumble upon a winning formula, is nothing new.
Honda did the very same thing with the entry of its Supercub motorcycle into the American market in the 1950s. Initially, Honda had aimed to tackle Harley Davidson head on, but soon discovered that its bike, used to short trips in Japan, was simply not built for long highway trips. Not only that, but motorcycle distributors preferred to focus on the higher margin Harley, and not compromise their relationship with the incumbent American manufacturer.
But Honda didn’t waste all of their resources pursuing this deliberate. They discovered that the few people who had purchased a Supercub were using it in a way that they hadn’t expected — for recreational purposes. And with that, Honda hatched a distribution deal with sporting goods retailers and the dirt bike phenomenon was born.
Emergent strategy, or validated learning, can be the difference between success and failure when it comes to new product development, particularly when operating in uncertain environments with previously untested products.
So, you work for a big over-regulated industry incumbent that can’t innovate do you?
If you’re interested in learning more about how to apply the Lean Startup in your organisation, you can join me in my Intro to The Lean Startup workshop on the 19th of May.
Originally published at www.collectivecamp.us.

What would happen if we all decided we were simply not going to pay our health insurance premiums. This is what we will need to do and there will be a first wave of folks who will die because hospitals and doctors will deny them care, but if we all stand strong together, we can crush this immoral system of health care.
But this is what we will have to do. We all know it; we’re just scared of dying. We’re scared of being killed in vain.


The publication is available exclusively to Munich Re clients.
The objective of the IT Trend Radar 2016 is to identify relevant new technologies for ERGO, Munich Re and MEAG and evaluate them from a group perspective.
Those who identify the potential of new technologies, trends and technological progress at an early stage have a competitive advantage and build the foundation for innovation.
Topics Online RSS feed Recommend page by e-mail Contact
We focus on the potential for innovation offered by individual trends, and review their suitability in practice for the reinsurance and primary insurance sector.
Read more

@MunichRe: “This infographic explains the biggest #insurtech trends: #IoT #DigitalHealth #3dprinting” open tweet »

How satellites and insurance are securing livestock in East Africa
Dr. Andrew Mude
In many parts of East Africa livestock provide the livelihoods for many herders and pastoralists who, especially with climate change on the rise, are often faced with severe threats from droughts.
A particularly bad drought could wipe out most of a herders livestock, leaving them without a source of food or income and with little recourse. It’s a problem that inspired Andrew Mude and his colleagues to launch Index-Based Livestock Insurance, a technology-enabled insurance program to protect herders against the devastating effects of drought… Read the rest of the story: https://www.devex.com/news/how-satellites-and-insurance-are-securing-livestock-in-east-africa-88962
How satellites and insurance are securing livestock in East Africa
For his work utilizing satellite technology to bring livestock insurance to herders and livestock in East Africa…www.devex.com

Months after my sister lost her daughter the insurance company sent a bill to her house addressed to my niece — the child who lived for two short weeks.
Please keep writing. I was so drawn in by this piece. I hope you are ok.
Also, here’s a story I wrote that you might find some comfort in:
Time Heals Nothing, but time changes everything.
This post may help someone trying to understand life after a great loss. This post could also make someone feel worse, bring up thoughts…medium.com
There are people who get this fog of grief. I am one. You can lean on me. I’ll never tell you that you’re wrong, that you need to hurry up or hurt less. I will be thinking about you everyday now.

Terrible news about the computers. Great news about insurance.

Should Your Boss’s Religious Beliefs Dictate Your Health Insurance Coverage? Supreme Court Nominee Judge Gorsuch Thinks So
Judge Gorsuch’s rulings on religious freedom did not consider the impact employers’ beliefs could have on female employees.

By Brigitte Amiri, ACLU Reproductive Freedom Project
February 2, 2017
One of the most popular components of the Affordable Care Act is the requirement that health insurance companies cover birth control without a co-pay. Over 55 million women have benefitted from the coverage. Nevertheless, over the last several years there has been an onslaught of court challenges to the birth control benefit by employers with religious objections to including the coverage in their employees’ health plans.
Judge Neil Gorsuch, President Trump’s pick for the Supreme Court, has played a key role in these cases. In each one he sided with the employers who claimed a right to use their religious beliefs to block their employees’ contraception coverage. In doing so, he showed little regard for the women affected by imposition of their bosses’ religious beliefs, and failed to acknowledge how important contraception coverage is to women’s health and equality.
Round one in the battle against the birth control benefit was brought by arts-and-crafts giant Hobby Lobby, and other for-profit companies, which had a religious objection to providing contraception coverage in their employees’ health plan. Before Hobby Lobby’s case reached the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit ruled in favor of Hobby Lobby. In that decision, Judge Gorsuch wrote a separate opinion to underscore that the family that owns Hobby Lobby would be complicit in sin if it allowed their employees’ health insurance company to cover contraception. Judge Gorsuch’s failure to give weight to the harms inflicted on women by these asserted religious exemptions is troubling.
Although the Supreme Court narrowly sided with Hobby Lobby, even the five justices who ruled in favor of Hobby Lobby considered the impact on women employees. The court noted that the government already had a system in place for religiously affiliated non-profit organizations that allowed those employers to opt-out of paying for contraception coverage by filling out a simple form, and instead the health insurance company would pay for the contraception coverage. This opt-out system, the court reasoned, could just be extended to religiously affiliated for-profit companies, and the impact on the employees would be “precisely zero.”
Round two in the battle against the birth control benefit was brought by a nursing home called Little Sisters of the Poor Home for the Aged, and other religiously affiliated non-profit organizations. Those employers objected to the opt-out system itself, arguing that filling out the form to opt out of providing contraception violated their religious beliefs. Eight of the nine courts of appeals to consider these challenges, including the Tenth Circuit, held that filling out a form did not substantially burden the employers’ religious beliefs. But Judge Gorsuch joined an opinion arguing that the Tenth Circuit should reconsider the decision in the Little Sisters of the Poor case siding, once again, with the employer.
When the Litter Sisters case, and others, reached the Supreme Court, under the name Zubik v. Burwell, the court did not decide the legal question but instead sent the cases back down to the lower courts to see if there was a way to appease the employers while still ensuring that women received contraception coverage. Again, the Supreme Court recognized the impact on female employees.
Judge Gorsuch’s disregard for the effect on women in these cases is troubling. If an employer blocks its employees’ access to contraception coverage, that employer is discriminating based on sex. Women already pay more for health care than men, and the contraception coverage requirement was designed to reduce that disparity. Equally important, contraception is crucial for women’s equal participation in society. Being able to decide whether and when to have children has a direct effect on women’s ability to make their own paths in terms of their schooling, their careers, and their families.
There is no question that religious liberty is a fundamental value, and one that we fight for here at the ACLU every day. But religious freedom shouldn’t give employers the right to discriminate against their female employees.
So when the Senate considers whether to confirm Judge Gorsuch to the highest court in the land, senators should ask him whether he believes women have the right to decide when to have children, and whether he believes that women should be treated equally in society.
Originally published at www.aclu.org.

I’m sure you’re going to succeed at making the insurance industry less boring Scott! Go go go!


CASE STUDY: World Leading Insurance Company, UK: F5 Remote Access Solution And Front End Customization For Secure Access To Webmail For Global Workforce.
Learn how this leading global insurance company has benefited from our F5 ADC expertise. By implementing a secure and resilient F5 infrastructure our client was able to provide its global workforce seamless and secure access to corporate applications such as Microsoft webmail. https://lnkd.in/e5zUvhW


Family and Medical Leave Insurance, Not Tax Credits, Will Help Families
by Eileen Appelbaum
It’s quite remarkable to see Republican presidential candidates Marco Rubio and Carly Fiorina advocating that employers provide and pay for family and medical leave for their workers. This is like asking homeowners to set up their own personal fund to replace their house if it burns down in a fire. It’s an expensive proposition that only the richest among us could afford — even if the government promised to subsidize 25 percent of the cost of rebuilding. Homeowners’ insurance, spread over millions of home owners, is the low-cost alternative that enables all of us to protect our homes in the event of a disaster.
For most private-sector employers, the cost of providing paid family and medical leave to their own employees is prohibitive. A handful of companies with deep pockets — including, most recently, Vodafone, Netflix and Virgin — have stepped up to provide paid maternity or parental leave. But these companies have capped their costs by limiting access to these programs. Unlimited parental leave at Netflix, for example, is not available to the company’s hourly DVD workers. Vodafone’s leave policy is limited to maternity leave and does not provide for the 65 percent of the company’s global labor force that is male. Virgin’s generous parental leave policy applies to just 140 employees that work for Virgin Management, the unit that handles the company’s financial investments and licensing agreements. Sen. Rubio’s (Fla.) paid family leave proposal would require the federal government to subsidize 25 percent of the cost of such leaves through a tax credit — a windfall to companies that already provide such leaves. Taxpayers will be footing the bill for paid leaves that very few of them will get to take.
Like homeowners’ insurance, a family and medical leave insurance program can drastically reduce the cost of providing income to all workers while they recover after childbirth, get over a serious illness, bond with a new child or care for a seriously ill family member. State paid family and medical leave programs in California, New Jersey and Rhode Island already do this by spreading the cost of their programs over millions of workers. The FAMILY Act, sponsored by Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-Conn.) in the House and Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand (D-N.Y.) in the Senate, would spread the cost of providing some income to workers when they need a family or medical leave over the more than 251 million workers in the United States. And it would guarantee that all workers have access to paid family and medical leave to care for themselves and their families.
In contrast to a family and medical leave insurance program, a tax credit for employers will increase, rather than decrease, unequal access to paid leaves. Employers that can afford to offer paid leaves to workers and want to do the right thing will benefit; but a tax credit will do nothing for workers whose employers either can’t afford or choose not to make such leaves available. Paid leaves provided as a result of tax credits won’t reach lower-paid and part-time workers — disproportionately women and people of color — who need such leaves the most.
Only a small fraction of the nation’s workforce needs a family or medical leave in any given year, but all working families are likely to experience the need for such a leave at some point. A national paid family and medical leave insurance program would cover all workers and would be affordable.
Originally published at http://thehill.com.

Big Data Already Paying Off in Insurance Fraud Detection

There’s a lot of talk right now about how big data is going to change insurance. Artificial intelligence and prescriptive analytics are definitely coming, and they will definitely change the insurance industry. To get a better idea of the specific ways in which big data applications are going to play out, it’s worth examining how data analytics are being used in the industry right now.
Many insurers’ initial forays into the world of big data focus on fraud detection. That makes sense — the Insurance Information Institute (III) estimates that 10 percent of property-casualty insurance industry losses each year are attributable to fraud, to the tune of $32 billion.
And most believe the problem is getting worse: 61 percent of property-casualty insurers report that the number of suspect frauds increased slightly or significantly over the past three years, according to a 2016 white paper issued by the Coalition Against Insurance Fraud. Insurance companies have always relied on technology to fight fraud. The III reports that 95 percent of insurers say they use antifraud technology, but about half say a lack of information technology resources prevents them from fully implementing it.
Enter big data. At the beginning of 2016, Towers Watson reported that 26 percent of insurance companies were using predictive analytics to address fraud potential. In the next two years, that number is expected to jump to 70 percent — more than any other big data application.
As data scientists team up with claims department leaders and other insurance professionals, many are looking to text mining as a crucial analytical tool for decoding enormous amounts of unstructured data.
Put simply, text mining is a way to scan large amounts of data for keywords, not unlike a web search. But claims departments are putting the technology to more sophisticated use, analyzing information for more significant data points and connections. Text mining can interpret claims adjusters’ handwritten notes and scan a claimant’s social media accounts for suspicious activity in nearly real time.
Read Full Story…
Posted on 7wData.be.

Marc-Antoine Brochard About Chronic Diseases, Prevention And Insurance
Marc-Antoine Brochard, entrepreneur and corporate Advisor
Marc-Antoine Brochard has three addictions : coffee, flow-state-generating activities and helping people build healthy habits. The latter has become his full-time job when he founded Stimul, a digital health company whose objective is to provide people at risk with scientifically-based, chronic disease prevention at scale using top-of-the-range web and design tools and technologies.
To put it into perspective: the Center for Diseases Control proved that a lifestyle-modification program reduced diabetes risk in prediabetics by 58%. This is an higher rate than the drug metformin which is the most taken by type 2 diabetics!
Raised and born entrepreneur
His path and passion for entrepreneurship might have been rooted deep inside him well before that. Marc-Antoine is the third generation of a family business in the food industry, Sodebo, famous for its pizzas, salads, pasta box or sandwiches. Growing up in an entrepreneurial environment fueled his desire to solve problems for people and build lasting companies out if it. In addition to his own venture in the digital health and wellness world with Stimul, he loves participating to the Sodebo adventure as well, as a non-operational member working on strategic projects such as international business development, long-term and corporate venture investing. He loves to jump from one to the other; from the opportunities of a medium-sized enterprises with 2,000 employees to the excitement of a young startup.
A polyvalent entrepreneur
Marc-Antoine had a very eclectic path taking all over the world
Before becoming an entrepreneur, Marc-Antoine had a very eclectic path taking all over the world. An alumni of Paris I Panthéon-Sorbonne, EM Lyon Business School as well as Cambridge University in very diverse fields from law, to corporate finance, social sciences and behavioural psychology. He had the great chance to live and work in Chicago in the United States, in London and in Sydney, Australia.
We’ve asked him questions to understand more the about the sector and current issues for chronic diseases prevention.
Preventable chronic diseases are the new plague
Most of chronic diseases could be avoided by building or maintaining healthy habits in the long term.
For the first time in our history, chronic disease has edged out other illness as the leading cause of death! And the worst? This tragedy is preventable. Marc-Antoine Brochard tells us “Stimul is therefore a digital health company whose objective is to provide people at risk with scientifically-based, chronic disease prevention at scale using top-of-the-range web and design tools and technologies. The problem we solve is having the right approach, the right support and the right tools to maintain healthy habits in the long-term.”
“Why? To enable corporations, pharma companies and insurance-providers to implement behaviour-change health & wellness programs with real return on engagement over time.”
“We believe in the power of the human connection. We run high-touch intervention programs delivered through our online platform that provides everybody with the capacity to build healthy lifestyle habits thanks to human coaching (yeah, real people!), personalization, connected devices, pedagogical knowledge and flexibility. So you work online with your coach, with your peers, with the tools we provide you with to reach your objectives and live a better, richer and disease-free life.”
Health issues and the need to change the way to insure
75% of insurance members will suffer from chronic conditions at some point in their life
“Now that our program is ready to go, we’re selling to insurance-providers and employers. You have to realize… 75% of insurance members will suffer from chronic conditions at some point in their life. And it’s due to physical inactivity, bad nutrition, sleep disorders, muskulo-skeletal disorders, stress.” The cost is massive for corporations as well. In 2017, PwC estimated the loss at 718 billion euros for European companies due to lost work hours and absenteeism. Just right now, 141 million people are in need of lifestyle-modification programs in Europe according to the European Health Agency. At the price point we’re able to offer, the intervention has a near-term cost-savings !
But it’s a huge change for insurers. In the past, an insurance company made money by collecting premiums and hoping that you would not use their services/covers. What we are building is turning this system on its head. “Now you’re insurer will work with you to help you manage your health risk by providing relevant services -like ours- to prevent you from getting sick. It’s a win-win-win situation… if insurers make the switch and bear the cost for the first year (before earning massive savings)”, said Marc-Antoine Brochard.
Why now?
The global online/mobile Health market has started taking shape. The healthcare market has two faces :
1. the patient pathway (hospitals, doctors appointments) 
2. time across the patient pathway — Wellness, Prevention, Diagnosis, As an addition to delivering social benefits, online health is now expected to drive revenue of US$ 23 billion in 2017.

Chronic disease management within the space? 70% of the revenues!
Chronic disease management within the space? 70% of the revenues!
There is a strong need to focus on key scaling factors to enable digital coaching at scale but there are challenges as well. We need government thrust (the first to benefit will be the public healthcare system!), favorable regulatory support (in the last health bill, “sport sur ordonnance” was made a reality), physician acceptance, insurer and corporation interest and… user adoption. A complex landscape that can prove to be moving slowly.
The role of corporations
Health and wellness can be put forward by corporations where we spend most of our time. And this has a true positive impact on employees.

Health and wellness programs were a nice extra in the past, they are now a strategic imperative, a key differentiator for employee engagement and in order to ditch those massive healthcare costs. Even more with an aging workforce.
Another figure:

Want to learn the digital health coaching 101? Read this article.

(Credit: Reuters)
Can Insurance Decide Whether You Survive Cancer?
Uninsured and Medicaid-covered cancer patients have shorter survival times, new study suggests
By Joshua A. Krisch
How long one can expect to live after receiving a cancer diagnosis can depend on many factors: the size of the tumor, the skill of the surgeon, the body’s response to the chemotherapy. But according to a new study in the journal Cancer, another factor often comes into play — patients who are uninsured or have Medicaid coverage tend to be diagnosed later and suffer worse outcomes.
“While improvements in medical therapy have resulted in longer survival, this benefit is less likely to be accessible to Medicaid-insured or uninsured patients,” said coauthor Judy Huang of Johns Hopkins, in a press statement. “Lack of insurance may lead to delays in diagnosis and more advanced and less curable disease,” added coauthor Christopher Sweeney of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, in a statement. “Our findings support the belief that early diagnosis and management is key, and removal of barriers to access to health care should be implemented.”
This is not the first paper to suggest that insurance status seems to affect clinical outcomes. One recent study in The Spine Journal found that Medicaid and uninsured patients were more likely to get sick in the hospital when undergoing cervical spine fusion. Another study found that these patients were also twice as likely to have advanced cancer when diagnosed and significantly more likely to die of their diseases. “Even when adjusting for many different factors, patients were still more likely to die if they had Medicaid coverage or no insurance,” the authors stressed.
For this new paper, two teams of researchers joined forces while studying testicular cancer and glioblastoma (a common brain tumor). For the testicular cancer study, Sweeney and his team identified more than 10,000 men diagnosed with testicular cancer and found that uninsured and Medicaid-covered patients, on average, presented with larger tumors and were more likely to die of their disease compared to men with insurance. For the glioblastoma study, Huang and her team identified nearly 14,000 patients diagnosed with glioblastoma. They not only found that uninsured and Medicaid-covered patients had later-stage cancer and died earlier, but they also found that these patients were less likely to receive surgical treatments and radiotherapy.
The tricky part is determining why insurance status should influence medical outcomes. Although it’s tempting to blame the healthcare providers and conclude that doctors are not as careful when treating uninsured patients, it is noteworthy that many uninsured patients come from lower income families, where a preponderance of unfortunate circumstances conspire against their good health. It is not inconceivable that the population on Medicaid is less healthy to begin with, and therefore more likely to have poor outcomes regardless of insurance status. In this case, physicians would be well advised to pay close attention to uninsured patients, who may be at greater risk.
Regardless of the reason, however, these studies demonstrate that the uninsured appear to be getting the short end of the stick when it comes to healthcare in the United States. In an accompanying editorial, Michael Halpern of Temple University and his colleagues note that, “while much of today’s research focuses on basic understanding of cancer and the development of new treatments, diagnostics, and molecular markers,” all is for naught if we cannot bring that cutting-edge science to patients — and ensure that all people have equal access to healthcare.”
“Adequate healthcare should be considered an inalienable human right,” Halpern writes. Greater emphasis is needed on realizing strategies that will make this happen.”
This story originally appeared on Vocativ on August 8th, 2016.
Follow us on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.

Yes. Health insurance.

Some consider things like no health insurance (or maternity leave, or paid overtime or workers comp) as a kind of “badge of honor “— part of the “disruption” — and expensive luxuries that shouldn’t be a company's responsibility.
In fact, big “successes” are often based on a mentality of “break/fix” — not real innovation. Looking closely, it’s easy to see the “break” part is legislation that millions fought long and hard for — in previous generations.
Nick Hanauer’s piece for Politico is a must read:
“The Pitchforks are coming — for us Plutocrats”
http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2014/06/the-pitchforks-are-coming-for-us-plutocrats-108014


Yes, Address to Congress on Health Insurance Reform is my favourite.
Here are some of my experiences with a healthcare system that I want every American, rich or poor, to have:
Kennedycare
Why do they call it Obamacare? And why the perjorative tone?medium.com
Endocarditis
My middle son, who is a twin, has Endocarditis. You wouldn’t think it to look at him: he’s the guy in the purple shirt…medium.com
Kennedycare
Senator Edward Kennedy wrote this letter to President Obama:medium.com
Healthcare — The Acutely Visible Sign of a Prosperous Inclusive Society
I am the mother of three teenage boys, one of whom has suffered a great deal from asthmatic bronchitis, one who has a…medium.com


Full Access Pass: including 2 day conference pass, networking breaks and exhibition
Diamond Pass Ultimate Learning
Save $600 with our Super-Early Bird Discount — Discount rate ends August 19th, that’s 2 days away.
Insurance Nexus is a trading name of FC Business Intelligence Ltd.
Receive a full event debrief report featuring all the key takeaways and facts from the event for your to share with colleagues
Read more

@IBMbigdata: “Insurance #IoT USA Summit: where the connected world meets insurance : #insuretech #IoT” open tweet »

Insuranceinfluencer dot com. Awesome #domain. If interested, just contact me. #Insurance #Influencer. RT ./@Crowdfire

Big Data Already Paying Off in Insurance Fraud Detection

There’s a lot of talk right now about how big data is going to change insurance. Artificial intelligence and prescriptive analytics are definitely coming, and they will definitely change the insurance industry. To get a better idea of the specific ways in which big data applications are going to play out, it’s worth examining how data analytics are being used in the industry right now.
Many insurers’ initial forays into the world of big data focus on fraud detection. That makes sense — the Insurance Information Institute (III) estimates that 10 percent of property-casualty insurance industry losses each year are attributable to fraud, to the tune of $32 billion.
And most believe the problem is getting worse: 61 percent of property-casualty insurers report that the number of suspect frauds increased slightly or significantly over the past three years, according to a 2016 white paper issued by the Coalition Against Insurance Fraud. Insurance companies have always relied on technology to fight fraud. The III reports that 95 percent of insurers say they use antifraud technology, but about half say a lack of information technology resources prevents them from fully implementing it.
Enter big data. At the beginning of 2016, Towers Watson reported that 26 percent of insurance companies were using predictive analytics to address fraud potential. In the next two years, that number is expected to jump to 70 percent — more than any other big data application.
As data scientists team up with claims department leaders and other insurance professionals, many are looking to text mining as a crucial analytical tool for decoding enormous amounts of unstructured data.
Put simply, text mining is a way to scan large amounts of data for keywords, not unlike a web search. But claims departments are putting the technology to more sophisticated use, analyzing information for more significant data points and connections. Text mining can interpret claims adjusters’ handwritten notes and scan a claimant’s social media accounts for suspicious activity in nearly real time.
Read Full Story…
Posted on 7wData.be.

The only ones worse at business than Donald Trump are health insurance corporate executives. The United States government LITERALLY finds and markets their product to potential customers, pays half or more of the purchase price and hunts them down if they don’t pay! How the hell do you not make money with that business model???
100 Letters to Senator Hillary Clinton
From the nomination to the 2016 election, there are 100 days. I intend to write one letter each day to Hillary Clinton…medium.com
Maybe it’s just time to go Singlepayer and cut out all these over-privileged whiners.

What every freelancer needs to know about business insurance.

If you’re a freelancer, you’re part of one of the fastest growing tribes in the UK. There are currently nearly 2m freelance workers across the country; that’s 6 per cent of the workforce, contributing a whopping £100bn to the economy[1].
Freelancing holds plenty of attractions, not least the freedom to choose your clients, your hours and your location. With flexibility, variety and no boss to answer to, for many it’s the perfect lifestyle.
On the flipside, freelancing also exposes you to certain risks that you wouldn’t face as a traditional employee, including responsibility for any damage or legal claims that arise. That’s why investing in the right insurance is essential, so you won’t be saddled with a crippling bill if anything goes wrong.
Yet, many traditional business policies aren’t designed for freelancers, due to the more flexible nature of what you do. It can be easy to find yourself with insufficient cover, or paying way too much, if you don’t shop around carefully.
To help you navigate your options, we’ve put together a quick guide to some of the policies you should consider, and how to make sure you get the best cover to match your needs:
Professional Indemnity cover
Most freelancers are in the business of offering consultancy or advice, which means that professional indemnity insurance (PI) is a good place to start. PI will protect you if you make a mistake, or if a client suffers — or claims to suffer — a financial loss as a result of your work, covering legal expenses and compensation you have to pay. So, if you’re a software developer, IT consultant, advertising or design consultant — or something similar — this is a must-have. You may also find that clients insist you have PI — so it could even help you win business (or not lose it!).

Watch out for: if you only work for part of the year, you can save money by choosing a subscription-style model that allows you to pay monthly and cancel at any time — such as that offered by Digital Risks.
Read more on PI in our blog on who needs professional indemnity insurance.
Contents
Chances are there’s some kit that you rely on for your business, whether that’s a laptop, filming equipment or more technical machinery — so, protecting this should be a priority. Office contents covers everything in the office, including your fit-out, computers, office equipment, furniture and documents. You should also consider portable equipment insurance, which covers everything you take out and about with you, such as laptops, mobiles, cameras and tablets.

Watch out for: if you’re based in a co-working space, you may find that insurers won’t cover you, stipulating that your belongings must be kept in a separate, locked office. So to make sure you’re fully protected, go for a PI policy like ours, which covers property left unattended in a co-working space, providing it was stolen through forceable access to the building itself, an office, locker or desk drawer. If you work on a desktop, you simply need to make sure they are attached to the desk with a Kensington Lock.
Find out more in our blog on how to insure your stuff in a co-working space.
Public liability insurance
PL protects you if you cause injury or property damage to a third party, either at your home office, co-working space, at a client’s offices, or when out and about. The need for this, and your level of cover, will depend on what you do, for example, if you’re a freelance film producer, you’re likely to require a higher level of cover than say a designer or copywriter working from home. Similarly, if you spend a lot of time going to events and visiting clients, this will increase your risk exposure.
Read more here about why you might need to review your public liability insurance.
Cyber-insurance
Cyber-attacks and data breaches are among the biggest risks currently facing small businesses and freelancers, so if you handle a lot of client data, cyber insurance should be a serious consideration. Cyber cover will protect you for a breach of data protection laws (where insurable by law) and your liability for handling data, as well as cover for extortion, system rectification costs, plus PR expenses and financial loss due to system downtime.

Watch out for: take note of the new data protection regulations that come into force in 2018, meaning the potential impacts of a breach will become even greater, with fines set to increase to as much as €20m. So, make sure you’re on top of cyber security, before it’s too late!
Find out more here about where to start with cyber security.
Freelancing can have its ups and downs and you need to stay motivated and switched on to make a success of it. Getting the right insurance gives you peace of mind and head space to focus on what you’re really good at — and what you get paid for — knowing that you’re protected, whatever happens!
Read: Simple tips for freelancers on avoiding late payments
Share this entry

Since Obamacare Enrollment Began, 6 Million More People Have Gained Public Insurance
An enrollment counselor helps Jerome Davis Jr. 36, sign up for Medicaid in Chicago. CREDIT: AP PHOTO/M. SPENCER GREEN
By the end of Obamacare’s open enrollment period, six million additional low-income Americans were enrolled in public insurance programs compared to the period before the health law’s coverage expansion, according to a new report from the Health and Human Services Department. The new enrollees were most highly concentrated in the states that agreed to expand their Medicaid programs.
Those six million people — who include enrollees in both Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) — are in addition to the eight million Americans who signed up for private plans on Obamacare’s state level insurance markets between October and April. Government officials are cautioning that the number of new public insurance enrollees may actually be even higher than that, since not every state has reported their data yet. And unlike the open enrollment period for the private marketplaces, people can enroll in Medicaid year round.
However, those gains aren’t being shared equally across states. “As we’ve seen for months, growth was more pronounced in states that adopted the Medicaid expansion: Enrollment in those states rose by 15.3 percent compared to the average enrollment from July through September 2013 while states that have not expanded reported only a 3.3 percent increase in enrollment during that same time period,” health officials explained in a blog post.
The disparity between the expansion and non-expansion states isn’t surprising. For months, the uninsurance rate has been falling faster in the states that have embraced the central tenets of Obamacare, including the expansion of Medicaid coverage to additional low-income residents. Meanwhile, thanks to GOP lawmakers’ continued resistance to this aspect of health reform, some of the poorest Americans have been locked out of health reform altogether.
Not every person who signed up for Medicaid over the past six months was a direct beneficiary of Obamacare’s expansion of the program. Some of them were likely simply re-enrolling in coverage. Others, such as the new enrollees in the states that didn’t agree to expand Medicaid, may have already been eligible for coverage, but didn’t sign up until the news coverage around Obamacare made them more aware of their health care options. Health policy analysts call that the “woodwork effect.”
Still, the Department of Health and Human Services notes that Obamacare is playing a big role. “Because of the Affordable Care Act, many consumers now have access to new, affordable, private health insurance options in the Health Insurance Marketplace, while many others are now eligible for their state’s Medicaid programs,” officials write.

When I commenced my first real job at about 20 years of age, a life insurance salesman was doing the rounds of the office. He had a flip book presentation of an average life: career growth > marriage > children > grand children > retirement > death. All was all laid out for you. Just fill in the years until you retire then you were allowed to go fishing for a few years before your death. The linearity of it all made me sick. I quit as soon as my year contract was up determined to flip that book around: do all the fun stuff first, find only interesting work and eradicate the concept of retirement. I travelled the world, climbed mountains, dived oceans, all sorts of interesting things then got involved in various business ventures. Never looked back. Don’t have life insurance.

ERP for Insurance Claims in Automobile Industry
Insurance Claims in Automobile Industry
In automobile industry, we often come across a scenario where a damaged vehicle comes to the service center for repair / service. If the damaged vehicle is insured, then the repair cost is either shared by Customer and Insurance Company or borne by insurance company entirely.
Suppose the repair cost is 1, 00,000 INR for the vehicle, then the invoice will be raised against the customer but since the damaged vehicle is insured, the customer will only pay partial amount say 40,000 INR whereas the remaining balance amount will paid by Insurance Company.
Since invoice is raised against the actual customer 60,000 INR amount is still on the debit side. Now, we have to move this balance from Customer to Insurance Company. For this we will have to configure Insurance Company as customer in Sage 300.
This can be done with the help of Adjustment entry by using some clearing account and then passing the Debit note entry against insurance company.
Below mentioned are GL effects entries of the entries.
AR Invoice Entry
Dr Cr Customer A 100000 Income account 100000
AR Receipt Entry
Dr Cr Bank 40000 Customer A 40000
AR Adjustment Entry
Dr Cr Clearing Account 60000 Customer A 60000
Debit Note
Dr Cr Insurance Company 60000 Clearing Account 60000
But Before passing this debit note as per protocol, many check points are there which needs to be verified.
Hence, we have developed a utility which will automatically create the debit note against the particular Insurance Company once all those check points are satisfied. Let’s us first discuss how the configurations and how entry will be recorded in Sage 300, ERP for Insurance Claims in Automobile Industry.
Entry 1: An Invoice entry will be raised against the Actual customer as you can see in below screen.

Now, against this invoice which worth 100000 INR customer will pay only 40000 INR.
Pending balance will be transferred to Insurance company customer with the help of adjust button as shown in below screen shot:

As you can see we have selected Dist. Code at this level which is linked to Insurance clearing GL code. You have to make that Insurance company customer Code and Dist. Code should be same. You will come to know the logic behind this when we discuss below screen.

This utility screen will create AR debit note on click of process against the insurance company customer.
Code of Insurance Company: This will be the list of all the distribution code from distribution master. Once you select the dist. Code and click on the go button, the program will fetch the data from adjustment which has the selected dist. Code at its detail line within selected date range.
The Grid in the above screen shows the following info:
Posting Date: Adjustment entry posting date.
Customer Name: Actual customer Name against whom invoice was raised.
Customer Code: Customer ID
Document Submitted: Implies whether required legal documents are submitted to insurance company or not.
Surveyor Certification Received: Indicates whether Surveyor Certificate is received from the Insurance Company.
Surveyor Certification Date: Certification received date.
Amount: Debit Balance
Debit Note: Indicates whether to create AP Debit Note or Not.
On click of process button program will create AP Debit Note for the Insurance company customer. As shown in the below screen:

Hence, by using this utility from Sage 300, ERP for Insurance Claims in Automobile Industry, you can easily manage Vehicles Insurance claims.
For more details on ERP for Insurance Claims and what ERP is best suited for your business, SMS SAGE to 56767. You can also write to Sage Software Solutions at salea@sagesoftware.co.in
Originally published at www.sagesoftware.co.in on November 14, 2015.


How Big Data Completely Transformed the Insurance Industry:
Big Data transforms the way in which the insurance industry operates, and all of this has big implications for both consumers and insurance agents.
Originally published on Tumblr

Obamacare Will Help LGBT People Access Health Insurance
Our guest bloggers are Andrew Cray, health policy consultant for LGBT Progress, and Kellan Baker, health care analyst for LGBT Progress.

Yesterday’s Supreme Court decision on the health reform law, popularly known as “Obamacare,” is a major victory for the millions of Americans who will have access to insurance for the first time under the Affordable Care Act. The law, which was a cornerstone initiative of President Obama’s first term in office, will serve as a lifeline for millions of people, including gay and transgender people, to the health care they need.
The Affordable Care Act is expected to extend health insurance coverage to more than 30 million people in 2014. Half of these people will be newly eligible for Medicaid, while the other half will be able to purchase affordable private coverage through new state health insurance exchanges.
The law requires each state to establish an exchange to make purchasing insurance simpler and more affordable for individuals and small businesses. The exchanges will function as marketplaces that allow consumers to easily compare and purchase health insurance plans, and individuals who make between $15,000 and $43,000 per year will receive subsidies to help them pay their insurance premiums.
This income bracket likely includes many gay and transgender people and their families, since discrimination in areas of everyday life such as employment and relationship recognition mean that gay and transgender people are disproportionately likely to be poor, unemployed, and uninsured.
Importantly for gay and transgender people and their families, the exchanges may not discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity in any of their activities, and all exchange plans must offer comprehensive benefits across 10 essential health benefit categories. These categories include vital services needed by many gay and transgender people, including prescription drugs, hospital stays, and mental and behavioral health services.
Yesterday’s decision upholding the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act means that many states will soon be racing to catch up to the 14 states (plus the District of Columbia) that have already established health insurance exchanges. As states set up their exchanges, advocates will have significant opportunities to include and engage LGBT people in working to ensure better health for everyone in America. With the clear force of law on our side, there is no better time for each of us to take action to guarantee that gay and transgender people and their families can get the care they need to stay healthy.

The Costs of Mental Illness, With & Without Insurance
by Crystal Kopp

Money problems and mental illness: two subjects still taboo in our increasingly open and accepting society. What makes these even worse is how often they are intertwined and one of the biggest places this happens the cost of treating them.
When I was fourteen I went into therapy for what would be the first of many times. I did think of the cost of such health care then. I was on my dad’s insurance; he paid the copays. When I was nineteen attending community college, I entered therapy again. While I was still on my dad’s insurance, I was working part time and paid my own copays. When I transferred to a four year college I was so excited to learn they had a free counseling center. I spent three years with the same therapist and was introduced to a psychiatrist who prescribed Effexor XR.
There was no generic for this ten years ago and even with my dad’s insurance it was $75 for a month’s supply. In the world of pharmaceuticals I know this isn’t much, but when you’re going to school full-time on full scholarship, no loans, and working a part time minimum wage job, $75 a month is a large chunk of cash. Nights out with friends revolved around half price appetizer hours, 2 for 1 drink specials and waiting for movies we wanted to see to hit the dollar theater. These are regular college student cost cutting methods I realize, but when it comes down to “if I eat out tonight with my friends I can’t afford the pills I need” you spend a lot of nights eating on your meal plan instead.
Upon graduating in 2007, I was 23 and kicked off my dad’s insurance (you Obamacare kids are so lucky). I was faced with the reality that my new day job of substitute teaching didn’t offer insurance nor did that part time job I still held and I had brand name prescription. I was fortunate enough that my college therapist informed me about a reduced cost mental health clinic in the area. Like most underfunded health resources for the poor and uninsured it was suspect, understaffed and the staff they did have overworked. The psychiatrist volunteered his time once a month and time slots were often triple booked months in advance to fit in as many people possible. As a result I spent many hours in the dingy, crowded waiting room reading books, missing a day of subbing to get see him. It was $15 to see the psychiatrist and $15 for a three month supply of your medication through the pharmaceutical’s prescription assistance program. Often times there were delays with getting your three month supply in which the nurse would supplement from the locked cabinet of never ending samples. Sometimes she would give me a whole bottle of my prescription for free and when I’d ask about it she always waved it off and said, “The reps will just bring us more.”
I continued going to this clinic until 2009 when it shriveled up because a psychiatrist could no longer volunteer his time due to health issues. I was fortunate enough that the office job I obtained in 2008 started offering insurance before I ran out of my last $15 three month supply. I found a psychiatrist who took my insurance and he changed my prescription to Cymbalta, another drug without a generic. This insurance plan had a $500 deductible that had to be met before they would cover any prescriptions. This was easy enough to meet since I had to pay retail for my 30 day prescription of Cymbalta and that was a little over $300. When the pharmacist ran my order up, I cried. $300 was half my paycheck! And I still my car payment and other bills to think about. Of course by the end of the year, I was paying $0 for my prescription but with the new insurance year around the corner I had to plan and save for that initial $300.
In 2012 I got a new job in the corporate offices of a local chapter of a non-profit organization. While I was paid more an hour and in a work environment that wasn’t toxic and actually appreciated me, they did not offer insurance. It was also this time my psychiatrist sold his practice because he was offered a teaching position at a university based on all his work on addiction. While I got on the list to see the new psychiatrist, I started seeing a therapist with the same company. Since I was still without insurance, I was paying $125 a session to see my therapist twice a month and $95 for fifteen minutes with my new psychiatrist every 2–3 months. I had to plan for this money just like it was another bill.
I often grew resentful and angry with my mental illness. That was $345 I could have put in that nonexistent savings account financial blogs tell me I’m supposed to have. Why was life so unfair? The manufactures of Cymbalta at least had a prescription assistance program I qualified for and I was able to get that pill for free. The Lamotrigine I was put on for my newly diagnosed bipolar was luckily generic and I could afford to get it at the pharmacy.
Then the end of 2013 happened and Obamacare was around the corner. I qualified for a significant tax credit and picked a silver plan that covered what I needed mental health-wise. My portion was only $154 a month; my $125 therapy sessions went down to $30 as did those $95 psychiatrist appointments. In February Cymbalta went off patent and I was switched over to the generic since I no longer qualified for the prescription assistance program now that I had insurance. Besides, the generic was only $4 with my insurance. Things were looking good mental health- and money-wise. But it didn’t stay that way.
In the middle of October, HR informed us that starting November 1st they would offer us insurance. I made a joke that they were probably tired of paying the Obamacare fee and that insuring us would be cheaper. In the weeks leading up to the 1st, I met with the brokers they brought in to pick a new plan out of what was offered. While the broker informed me that most of my coworkers were going with the cheaper monthly bronze plan, I took a look at it and realized it wasn’t for me. I couldn’t afford to pay full price on my appointments until I met a $5,000 deductible.
So I went with the silver plan with set copays. Even after my therapist suggested a few brokers to see if I could get a cheaper plan outside of work, they weren’t cheaper. I sadly canceled my awesome Obamacare silver plan and settled into my work ‘s silver plan. I am now paying $262 a month for insurance and $50 for my copays. My pills at least only went up about $10 each.
It’s easy to get upset with how much I spend on these things, but that’s not — ha! — healthy. I have to learn to accept that this is part of my life, health and money wise. Therapy sessions and medication will forever be a part of my budget the way insulin is part of a diabetic’s life. Yes, it’s frustrating, and puts a damper on other things, but despite all the costs I can add up my health is priceless.
Crystal Kopp is candid about her type II bipolar, her love of cats, and that she lives with her parents. She’s a recovering shopaholic slowly but surely taking control of her finances. She just finished the first draft of her novel bringing her one step closer to achieving the dream she’s had since she was six of being a published novelist.
Gif via Tumblr


Can Canadians Purchase Private Health Insurance Coverage?
By Igor Volsky
The August Town Halls have buried any meaningful coverage of the health care debate. Groups like Freedomworks and Americans For Prosperity are generating wild rumors about the proposed health care reform and the overwhelming majority of media coverage has merely contrasted protesters’ claims with administration retorts, while failing to correct the record. The format creates the illusion of balance and, by giving equal time to a false claim, pads disingenuous arguments.
Fortunately, this report from NPR’s Sarah Varney is a respite from the norm. Rather than reprinting the claim that Canadian health care system indiscriminately rations care, Varney actually examines the Canadian health care system and concludes that it’s getting a “bum rap.” Just like Medicare beneficiaries who protest against “government health care,” protesters who use Canadian care as an example of “government interference” or rationing, will be surprised to learn that the Canadian health care system relies on both government and private insurers to provide Canadians with comprehensive coverage:
Canada has a universal health care system that’s paid for through income taxes and sales tax. All Canadians are covered, and they can see any doctor they want anywhere in the country with no copays or deductibles….And while the individual provinces and territories set their overall health budgets and administer the health plans, the delivery of medical care is private. Doctors run their own businesses and then bill the government.
As it turns out, the system works fairly well:
- Physicians in Canada earn a good living and aren’t faced with the same administrative hassles that American doctors gripe about.
- The Commonwealth Fund looked at deaths that could have been prevented with access to quality medical care in the leading 19 industrialized countries. In the latest survey, the United States ranked last and Canada came in sixth.
- When federal spending on Canadian health care declined during a recession in the 1990s, lines for non-urgent procedures — and some urgent ones — grew. In response, Canada’s government poured billions of dollars into reducing wait times in the five medical areas deemed most troublesome, including cancer care, cardiac care and joint replacement surgery. And wait times for these services has dropped: Most provinces now report those times on publicly available Web sites.
- Few Canadians go south for medical care. Canadian researchers say it’s a bit like getting struck by lighting — it’s extremely rare, but when it happens, everyone talks about it.
- Public opinion polls continue to show strong support for publicly financed, universal health care in Canada.
Varney contradicts the oft-repeated claim that Canadians can’t purchase health insurance coverage by writing that many Canadians purchase private coverage for “optometry, dentistry and outpatient prescription drugs” — services the public plan does not cover. Yet at the end of the piece, she quotes a pollster who notes that the Canadian health care system “’is not something that everybody is completely satisfied with or complacent about.’ About half of Canadians say they would like the option to buy a private health insurance plan. Currently, that’s not allowed.”
Canadians can purchase supplemental private coverage for services that are not covered by the public plan, but cannot purchase private insurance for basic services. As CBC News points out, private health insurance is “a crucial part of the system,” and Canadians spent about $43.2 billion on private coverage in 2005. Private insurance covers “anything beyond what the public system will pay for. For instance, should you have to spend some time in the hospital, the public system will cover the cost of your bed in a ward, which usually has three other patients. If you want a private room, the extra charge will come out of your pocket, unless you have extended health coverage either through your employer or through a policy you have bought yourself.”
Basic services are covered by the government precisely because the large risk pools allow the government to negotiate cheaper rates with providers and control health care costs. The government fears, with good reason, that if Canadians can leave the purchasing pools, the government’s market power would diminish.

GA Rep. Price: Opening Health Insurance To People With Pre-Existing Conditions Is A ‘Terrible Idea’

One of the most popular provisions of the Affordable Care Act prevents insurers from denying coverage to Americans with pre-existing conditions. But Republicans seek to repeal the law in its entirety and have gone to great lengths to oppose the new consumer protection. Just ask Georgia Rep. Tom Price, a medical doctor, who has introduced a replacement bill which would not require insurance companies to accept people with pre-existing conditions. When asked why he omitted that provision, Price was blunt in his assessment:
They are even divided over whether some of the popular pieces of Obama’s health law are a good idea. For example, most Republicans support the health law’s requirement that insurance companies accept all applicants — but the replacement plan put forward by the most prominent Republican ignores that idea.
“It’s a terrible idea,” Rep. Tom Price (R-Ga.), the sponsor of the plan, told POLITICO. He said Democrats only enacted the provision in order to require exactly what kinds of insurance Americans must have. He would rather expand coverage voluntarily.
Price may think opening coverage to Americans who need it most is a “terrible idea,” but for many of those Americans, it is a matter of life or death. As many as 122 million Americans have an illness which could result in an insurer denying them coverage; they paid as much as $4,844 more a year for health care than those without pre-existing conditions. And a study from 2009 found that 45,000 Americans a year died because they don’t have access to care.
Despite some Republican claims that this provision would somehow do more harm than good, children up to the age of 19 are already receiving care regardless of pre-existing conditions as a result of the law. By 2014, that provision will extend to everyone. If, on the other hand, the individual mandate is repealed, health insurers have already said they will return to the practice of denying coverage to sick Americans.
-Zachary Bernstein

After failure of Obamacare CO-OPs, bill would shield consumers of terminated plans from insurance mandate
Under the Affordable Care Act, more commonly known as Obamacare, a number of Consumer Operated and Oriented Plans — or non-profit marketplaces to provide individuals with health insurance — were set up. Unfortunately, many of these little-known “CO-OPs” have failed, with only six out of the original 23 exchanges still in existence.
But the requirement that every American must have health insurance or pay a fine? That’s still in existence, even for the many people whose health insurance was provided through one of those CO-OPS. A bill that just passed the House would exempt those individuals.
What the bill does
The CO-OP Consumer Protection Act, H.R. 954 and S. 3311, would exempt anybody who lost their health insurance because of a CO-OP failure from paying the required fine for those who don’t have health insurance. This year, that fine is either 2.5 percent of one’s income or $695 per adult, whichever is higher.
The bill was introduced by Rep. Adrian Smith (R-NE3) and Sen. Ben Sasse (R-NE), both of Nebraska. After the House version was introduced all the way back in February 2015, it passed the House in September 2016 on a 285–165 vote. Although Republicans were unanimous in their support, 16 Democrats also crossed the aisle to vote in favor.
What supporters say
Supporters argue the bill fixes an unintended consequence of CO-OP failures and prevents an unnecessary tax on a not-insubstantial segment of Americans.
“Hundreds of thousands of people have lost health coverage because of these coop failures. And the damage does not end there. Because of Obamacare’s individual mandate, those same folks are now subject to a tax penalty for not having insurance,” House Budget Committee Chairman Rep. Tom Price (R-GA6) said in last week’s Weekly Republican Address.
“The same law that encouraged people to sign up for these doomed coops — and did nothing while they imploded — is now penalizing folks who lost their coverage. This is ridiculous, and the American people should not have to put up with it.
What opponents say
Opponents argue the bill would create unnecessary exemptions in a law that should apply to everybody equally, and that this bill is just another Republican-led attempt to dismantle Obamacare piece by piece after unsuccessfully attempting to repeal it wholesale at least 62 times.
“In such circumstances [where health insurance is lost or cancelled], the Administration has offered special enrollment periods, provided consumer outreach, and worked with state departments of insurance to ensure consumers have smooth transitions to other health plans,” the White House wrote in their statement of intent to veto the bill. “[The bill] is unnecessary given consumer protections already available.”
“The [individual mandate] provision helps prevent people from waiting until they get sick to buy health insurance or dropping health insurance when they believe they do not need it,” the statement continues. “Weakening the individual responsibility provision would increase health insurance premiums and decrease the number of Americans with coverage.”
Odds of passage
The bill passed the House in September after attracting seven cosponsors, all Republicans. It now goes to the the Senate, where it has also attracted seven cosponsors, all Republicans. The bill has been referred to the Senate Finance Committee, where it awaits a vote.
This article was by GovTrack Insider staff writer Jesse Rifkin.

NRA Offers ‘Stand Your Ground’ Insurance To Cover Legal Costs Of Shooting People In Self-Defense
By Ali Gharib

In a rare “scoop” for an editorial cartoonist today, Matt Bors skewered a little-known National Rifle Association (NRA) program that offers insurance to cover policy holders’ costs should they become embroiled in a legal battle after shooting someone in self-defense.
The insurance — technically endorsed by the NRA and administered by Lockton Affinity exclusively for NRA members — is available as a rider to the “excess personal liability” plan. Here’s how the website advertises the added coverage for self-defense (emphasis in the original):
What’s Covered:
• Provides coverage up to the limit selected for criminal and civil defense costs.
 
• Cost of civil suit defense is provided in addition to the limit of liability for bodily injury and property damage.
 
• Criminal Defense Reimbursement is provided for alleged criminal actions involving self-defense when you are acquitted of such criminal charges or the charges are dropped.
The basic liability plan costs either $47 or $67 annually, for coverage up to $100,000 or $250,000, respectively. Though the coverage amounts stay the same, a policy holder can add the self-defense insurance by paying $118 or $165 for the lesser coverage, or between $187 and $254 for the larger plan. (The discrepancies are due to the different prices for coverage on two different webpages from the insurer.)
The NRA pushed its members in 2005 to support Florida’s controversial “stand your ground” law — an exemption from arrest or prosecution in shootings where the police think the act was in self defense. When the law got bad press after police let the man who shot and killed Florida teenager Trayvon Martin go free, the NRA refused to back down, continuing to support the law’s passage in other states (amid other acts of insensitivity around Martin’s shooting death).
Here’s Matt Bors’ cartoon skewering the insurance program:


I Just Got Health Insurance, Should I Get An MRI Or Something?
by Adam Baer

Somehow Still-Alive Guy is not a doctor, and he does not provide medical advice. But he has seen all the doctors! And is currently still alive, and here to answer questions from you. Remember, there are no stupid medical questions — only answers that can get you killed.
Dear Somehow Still-Alive Guy,
I’m 34 and I just got health insurance for the first time since being on my parents’ plan after college. I never go to the doctor. I actually don’t even have a doctor. But all kinds of things could be wrong with me. I feel pretty normal but I started noticing some stuff. I think I might be depressed. I gained weight. I don’t sleep but when I do I wake up sweaty like Bruce Springsteen working the arena. I get gnarly headaches and random pains in my stomach. I have these weird skin tags all over. I still keep getting drunk even though I can’t handle my liquor the way I did ten years ago. Now that I have some coverage should I just get a head-to-toe body scan of some kind so we know everything that we’re dealing with here?
Thanks,
No Rage Against the Machine
Dear NRATM:
Before we talk about why you or anyone shouldn’t just get a “head-to-toe body scan” to offer some relief from becoming the anxiety ball that not having health insurance can make one, let’s acknowledge a truism: Despite the perpetual whining in the media about medical overtesting, no doctor in his or her right mind will prescribe a scan — CT, PET, or MRI — of any body part for you without an undeniably good reason.1 And that reason has to be: he or she thinks something nefarious could be growing inside you (not just existential angst, resentment, or fat cells) — or in the more orthopedic sense, that there’s a problem with one of your joints, a sprain-injury, tear of ligaments, etc., perhaps from supporting a flesh-chassis too heavy for its wheels.
Let’s say for the purpose of our argument, however, that you’ve found the equivalent of that doctor who kinda-killed Michael Jackson — or anyone else who would be willing to agree to this fast-food drive-thru interpretation of “preventative medicine.” A scan of this type would certainly cost a healthy four figures, and that’s without factoring in perhaps separate steep bills for analyses by radiologists and neuroradiologists (assuming you want your worried brain scanned, too). What’s more, few insurance companies will cover this kind of on-demand scan unless someone with an M.D. in a specialty related to a specific problem claims — and proves — medical necessity, or, in “Law & Order”-speak, has “probable cause.”
So you’d basically have to be independently wealthy to have a full-body scan done for no specific reason as a relatively healthy person, and even then, you’d probably have a hard time finding a medical team to approve — and independently want you to do — it in our sweet summer of love for American healthcare. I also assume that the insurance plan you just managed to nab, perhaps via a job or luckily employed life partner, is not the same brand of luxurious health coverage currently given to Senators and CEOs. So I’d watch that deductible the way that you presumably watch your count of Twitter followers. Every number matters, and there’s nothing more miserably out-of-body, anxiety-provoking than finding yourself in a year-long, three-way virtual shoot-em-up between a medical provider and insurance company — all because you thought that a procedure was going to cost “n,” and it turns out that now, despite the “promise” in your plan to cover that specific thing, it costs “’n’ x 7.” (Promises in today’s health-insurance policies, as in the course of having sex, are sort of offered for momentary satisfaction only.)
Having had a few of the cancers and their mysterious late effects, I’ve experienced a few too many MRIs, CT-scans, and full-body films done in my time (the latter often being nuclear and PET-CTs, which I’ll define for you in a minute). At any rate, I’m sorry that I’ve had to have so many big-budget films made of my innards (and, to date, none made of my stories).
Why do I regret such highly personal imaging? I’m now one crazy-radioactive mofo (the magnetic part, I still work on), and my chances for even more cancers are exponentially increased because of extra exposure to the radiant power that still perfumes the blustery winds of Chernobyl.
We complain about having to go through security scanners in airports, but I’ve had so much radiation therapy that, while I should avoid more unnecessary scanning like I would a job removing asbestos without a protective spacesuit, I could spend the day in one of those TSA booths, chain-smoking and eating deep-fried Twix bars, and I’d emerge with only a little more damage to my body than the reason radioactive rays of light sometimes seem to burst out of it.
Simply put: You don’t want an ounce of this shit, believe me, and getting a full-body CT or PET scan (the latter being a 3-D nuclear thing that could titillate a Pixar director) will make you glow to more people than your mother. I say stop the radiation Peace Train before it starts (because it’s hard to slam on the brakes once there are real reasons to snap invasive selfies). As for MRIs, well, they use magnets, and it’s a little like baking you in a private, one-person tunnel with lightly heated walls. There’s no ionizing radiation there, but it has its minuses, too, especially if you sneak some bling into it — unlikely but possible, depending on what you may have had pierced after a late night in the bottle — or if your body dislikes being infused with a rare-earth metal in liquid form often used as a “contrast” to light up areas of radiologic intrigue. (Other possible “contrast” infusions for scans include an iodine-based juice, for CT scans, and a radioactive “tracer” for PET scans. You pee these contrasts out like your Jack-and-cokes, but if you try to fly somewhere right after this brand of film debut you may have to tell airport security that you do not have a bomb velcroed to your colon.)
Sounds to me like you really need to accept that the vodka-for-your-thirties is something green that you can grow, or for that matter, pills (not too many), and then get a serious, full physical, including a referral to a psychotherapist, dermatologist and maybe other specialists. My guess is that improving the fuel that you ingest, and that working and partying less hard as well as exercising more — along with getting yourself under the care of an internist passionate about real preventative medicine — will save you worlds of hurt. Of course, this is pretty damn hard in our time of super-specialized medicine, especially when a physician you might get a referral to isn’t on an insurance network, but this is when the game gets fun and you can start meeting doctors — most likely, younger, smart ones — and blog about your adventures like no one else.
Pretend you’re on your own reality show, and cast for the character who will bring your fictionalized self the most relief. I’m not going to lie: night sweats, stomach pains, depression, insomnia, and headaches are symptoms to ask a doctor about, but they’re also non-specific (especially for someone who overeats, worries, breathes, and drinks) and often related to the way you live. Doctors can only help you with what they do. They can’t keep you from leaving an appointment about your auto-immune hypothyroid condition and going to eat at the joint some Power Yelper calls “Nirvana for Fried Chicken Fanatics and Foodies Gunning for Diabetes.” They can’t make you hike or swim or just get the hell up from your chair every 15 minutes, and they certainly can’t make you eat stuff that actually heals you and prevents illness (see whatever doctor-as-personal-brand is currently shilling his or her “eat plants like your grandmother did” or “sugar is the devil” diet book for some general suggestions).
Full body scans are also not recommended if you’re a claustrophobe, although having to sweat my way through one super-long brain scan last year did possibly help me lose a few pounds in water weight and feel happy about the size of my apartment. For a day.
Then of course there’s the delightful False-Positive, especially prevalent with MRIs. Imaging, even in today’s physics-geek paradise, is far from perfect, and scans, especially the kind done wherein they infuse your bloodstream with heart-warming iodinized, radioactive or metal contrasts, are prone to shine a light on all kinds of nondescript (and likely benign) areas of inflammation that you don’t need to know about. (Some restless motion in the circular coffin in which you’re supposed to remain still forever can cause this, too.) Of course that’s where the fun begins for the hypochondriac (cue Woody Allen’s character in Hannah and Her Sisters). So maybe get an MRI. Just make sure that you truly dig extraordinarily loud banging sounds. Because that’s what you’ll hear for an hour while you worry that you may pass out inside your tiny cylindrical hole (p.s. so-called “Open MRIs” with more room are great, but they’re less precise, and we don’t want to miss a possible hint that you may be closer to the relief of death than you thought, so stick with the real thing).
If I had to venture a guess, I’d say that you’re going to be fine, but I’m not in the business of dishing out calm or blindly “thinking positive” (as anyone in my family or group of friends who doesn’t worship the religion of entropy like me will tell you). What I will offer as consolation is the comment that the thing you think is going to save you from lots of doctor appointments and perhaps some painful lifestyle revamps is mildly awful and potentially bad for you, and will also win you a number of more doctor appointments. Honestly, you’re probably better getting very high and just hallucinating so that you can see all of your imagined medical problems in one short spell without even having to drop a co-pay.
That said, if you find a doctor who’s loose with the MRI prescription pad, let me know? I’m already due for my yearly brain scan, according to the Boston radiation oncologist who once expertly shot protons into a tumor in the base of my skull — and a local LA physician that I’ve used just dropped my insurance.
And welcome to the world of the Covered! A land where you cannot, in good faith, complain about: everyday billing problems (which can involve serious coin), medical issues that you now may choose not to address, and the chance to develop a new income stream simply to fund the expert care of your body. Like me, you can also still support the Health Insurance for Everyone plight, but now you can feel guilt about not being one of the needy and join a string of organizations devoted to the cause so that you can sleep at night. Thanks, most likely, to the brand-name snooze drug that only costs you $50 a month.
1. One MRI/CT detail: Imaging techs frequently don’t offer full body MRIs or CTS, done in one shot. They do them in sections — foot/ankle, legs, pelvis, abdomen, chest, neck, head. In theory you could stay in the room and just have them do all of those films. But PETs or PET-CT’s and nuclear-medicine scans (like Gallium Scans) are the true full-body scans done in one shot.
Got the shakes? Funny-colored toes? Addicted to beets? Other trouble with feets? A weird craving for pennies? A spouse with fleas? A doctor with weird knees? Don’t hesitate, ask Somehow Still-Alive Guy today!
Adam Baer (aka Somehow Still-Alive Guy) is The Awl’s vexing medical questions advice columnist. He’s not a doctor but a functional young survivor of too many potentially fatal and mysterious maladies, as well as cutting-edge treatments and procedures that include classically funny words like “stem cells,” “endoscopic neurosurgery,” “sub-lethal chemo,” and “bone-marrow transplant.” Adam’s written essays and stories for NPR, the New York Times, and Harper’s, among other publications. He lives in Los Angeles, and seems curiously normal. Pictured: a CT scanner, photographed by “Phillip.”

STUDY: Medicaid Provides Better Insurance Than Private Coverage And Medicare
By Jeff Spross

Medicaid gets a bad rap from a lot of conservatives for poor access to health care and poor health outcomes. It’s one of the main arguments in favor of schemes to cut Medicaid funding and block grant it to the states, on the grounds it will promote efficiency and innovation in the program.
But a new study in the Journal of General Internal Medicine found that when you compare the proper groups, Medicaid actually does a better job delivering access and affordable coverage than either private coverage or Medicare.
As Aaron Carrol summed up at the Incidental Economist, the study focused on the underinsured — that is, people on insurance plans that just aren’t very good — rather than those who have no insurance. More importantly, it only looked at people at or below 125 percent of the poverty line. That’s important because the problem with the studies showing Medicaid delivering inferior results to private coverage is that it’s difficult for their comparisons to avoid the apples-to-oranges problem. Medicaid is meant for poorer Americans — you have to be below a certain income threshold to qualify for it — but private coverage is available to the poor and well-off alike. It’s a matter of basic economic logic that the private plans only the well-off can afford will will provide much better access and quality care then the plans the poor can afford as well. Products poor people can afford tend to be poor products.
That’s why safety net programs like Medicaid, which provide people more assistance than they could afford in a pure free market world, are so important. And why, when the proper apples-to-apples comparison is made between poor people on private insurance and poor people on Medicaid, the latter’s performance improves remarkably:
For the purposes of this study, underinsurance was defined as (1) having out-of-pocket expenses that were more than 5% of household income, (2) delaying or failing to get needed medical care because of cost, or (3) delaying or failing to get needed medications because of cost. This study specifically looked at adults who had full-year continuous coverage in some form, but had an income less than 125% of the poverty line. They specifically wanted to know how many of those people were still underinsured.
They found that more than a third of these adults were underinsured. What’s more is what kind of insurance left people underinsured. More than 65% of those people on Medicare were underinsured. More than 37% of people with private insurance were underinsured. But only 26% of people on Medicaid were underinsured. People who were underinsured were more likely to be White, in poor health, and unemployed. Even after adjusting for these factors, those on Medicaid were significantly less likely to be underinsured than those on private insurance (odds ratio 0.22).
The gap between Medicaid and Medicare, meanwhile, is most likely due to Medicare’s higher co-pays and other forms of cost-sharing. While this generally won’t be a problem for seniors in the middle class and up, it can be difficult for poor seniors to meet their share of the costs.
Other studies have come to similar conclusions as the one above. The Government Accountability Office found that people on Medicaid didn’t report any more difficulties obtaining medical care or prescription medicines than people on private insurance. Medicaid does have a problem when it comes to providing adequate dental care, and the GAO found more complaints from Medicaid recipients on that score. Children on Medicaid also tended to fair better than adults on Medicaid. And among the Medicaid recipients who did report difficulties, more of them cited long wait times, delayed appointments, and difficulty contacting providers than people on private coverage.
So Medicaid does have its challenges. Its reimbursement rates for doctors are significantly lower than Medicare’s, meaning that more care providers are willing to accept Medicare patients, and the program’s access and networks are better — assuming the recipient can afford the cost-sharing. But the way to fix this is to bulk up government spending on Medicaid, which is currently well below Medicare’s levels. And Carrol lays out a number of ways the health care reform passed by President Obama and the Democrats will improve things.
It’s entirely possible, even likely, that people on Medicaid suffer lackluster health outcomes not because they’re on Medicaid, but because they’re poor. Obviously, cutting and block-granting the program would make this situation worse, not better.

Insurance Industry Shows ‘Profound Lack Of Preparedness’ For Climate Risks
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
By Ari Phillips
The insurance industry exists to provide a first line of defense against disasters, but so far the industry’s response to climate change-related risks has been more fearful than forceful.
An extensive new report found that out of 330 insurers, only nine merited top ratings when it comes to climate policies — only two of which are American companies, Prudential and The Hartford. Using insurers’ responses to a climate risk survey by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, the report by environmental non-profit Ceres, found that barely 10 percent of the insurers’ surveyed had issued public climate risk management statements that explain the risks and implications of climate change to their businesses.
The combined effects of increasing urbanization and climate change are driving higher annual losses from natural catastrophes, according to the report. Over the past three decades, annual losses from natural catastrophes have continued to increase while the insured portion has declined, leaving governments, businesses and individuals to absorb a bigger share.
In 2013, insurance covered less than a third of the $116 billion in global losses from weather-related disasters, according to data from the reinsurer Swiss Re. “In the long run,” the Ceres report says, “these coverage retreats transfer growing risks to public institutions and local populations, and reduce the resiliency of communities, which are less able to finance post-disaster recoveries.”
The 330 respondents to the survey represent 87 percent of the nation’s insurance market, and in 2012 they collected a combined $989 billion in premiums. One of the reasons insurers are hesitant to take on climate risks is the growing threat of litigation — a situation other industries also find themselves exposed to. According to a 2011 United Nations report, in a single year the world’s 3,000 largest public companies were causing an estimated $1.5 trillion of environmental damage directly due to GHG emissions. According to the report, this is damage for which major emitters of GHGs, along with local, state and federal governments, are already being held legally accountable.
For instance, earlier this year Farmers Insurance filed nine class-action lawsuits arguing that local governments in the Chicago area are aware that climate change is leading to heavier rainfall but are failing to prepare accordingly. The suits allege that the localities did not do enough to prepare sewers and stormwater drains in the area during a two-day downpour last April.
The suit was withdrawn shortly after it was filed due to the “sheer size and complexity” of the case, however Farmers felt it had accomplished its goal of bringing attention to the issue. “We believe our lawsuit brought important issues to the attention of the respective cities and counties, and that our policyholders’ interests will be protected by the local governments going forward,” said a Farmers spokesman in a statement.
According to the Ceres report, there are likely to be more claims of climate liability in the future.
The bottom line — we can anticipate growing uncertainty, increasing the complexity, and a wide variety of coverage-related legal questions related to climate change confronting insurers, policyholders and other stakeholders. Lawsuits are an inevitable part of the American system for determining whether and how to compensate for damages, and the larger the alleged injuries from climate change, the greater the recovery efforts will be.
“There’s a huge reluctance to even use the word climate change,” study author Cynthia McHale, insurance program director at the Boston-based nonprofit Ceres, told the New York Times. “Insurance companies did not underwrite or price for climate liability. So their lawyers advise them not to talk about it and not to use the word.”
Insurance industries can’t just ignore the risks of climate change or stop writing policies that may be vulnerable to climate impacts. This would put them out of business. This is where government regulators and policymakers are needed. If insurers cant align their premiums with the risk — then the risks are probably not worth it. For example, a recent study found that more than 6.5 million homes along the U.S. Atlantic and Gulf coasts are at risk of storm surge inundation, representing nearly $1.5 trillion in total potential reconstruction costs. The report, by CoreLogic, a global property information company, states that “this exposure could constitute significant risk for homeowners and financial services companies, as many at-risk homes lack protection from insurance coverage.”
So perhaps people shouldn’t be building in areas especially at risk from sea level rise and storm surges. The insurance industry could help facilitate this change by issuing corporate climate policies, accounting for climate risk in their methodologies, and evaluating climate risks and opportunities in their portfolios. As it stands, the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), which is overseen by FEMA, insures many flood-zone residents. When they can’t cover the costs, they look to taxpayers. Starting with Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and building up to Hurricane Sandy, which came a few months after the reforms, NFIP found itself completely fiscally insolvent, exhausting the premium-funded resources of FEMA and requiring around $28 billion in taxpayer-funded bailouts.
“The view of the industry is that there is not risk-adequate pricing in those areas, and that’s why the government is the primary insurer there,” Munich Re America CEO Tony Kuczinski said in a press conference call. “If rates were allowed to move in a direction that’s more accurate, it would encourage behavior change.”
David Kodama, senior director for research and policy analysis for the Property Casualty Insurers Association of America, told the Insurance Journal that he considers the report too negative.
“I think it’s unfortunate that it takes such a 90-percent-of-the-glass-empty approach,” he said. “I do believe there is significant common ground that we can advocate on to raise our climate change consciousness level across the nation. We don’t try to avoid this conversation at all. The report makes it seem like don’t want to engage, but we do.”

Health insurance is unsustainable
I wrote this essay back in March, 2012 immediately after SCOTUS listened to arguments about the constitutionality of the ACA. It still applies.
* * *
The Supreme Court of the United States of America just listened to three days of argument as to whether or not the recent Affordable Care Act (ACA) is Constitutional. Central to the twenty-six States’ argument is that the Federal government can not compel its citizen to purchase something they they do want to buy.
Like these opponents of the ACA, I have a big problem with the Federal government telling me what I should and should not be buying. But I have an even bigger problem with my fellow citizens who insist on sucking out only the benefits of citizenship without shouldering any of the responsibilities. In short, we should never be at a juncture where the government is forced to make us play nice with each other.
What affects you, affects me. The United States of America is our community and we should never cede control to a government because we can’t figure out how to take care of each other.
Solve that problem and you have a small government.
But I digress.
What we are calling health insurance is not really insurance. It is just a way to pay for health care. Mandating citizens buy health insurance is not at all like forcing them to buy car insurance. Not buying health insurance is an act of denial by some that their bodies will not get sick or injured.
If we want to stick with an automobile metaphor, it is more like being in denial about changing your car’s oil and expecting it to run forever simply because the oil is healthy today. Ignoring your health care by pretending you will always be healthy only acknowledges you are healthy today but ignores the fact that your body wears over time. Like oil, some bodies break down faster than others. Sometimes, the oil pan gets punctured even when the driver is careful.
In other words, illness and injury are a certitude with a human body. It’s just a matter of when. No business worth a damn capitalizes based on certain loss.
The pre-ACA health insurance market was unsustainable and the industry knows it. What nobody is saying is that the health insurance companies were unsuccessful at selling insurance to young, healthy people, so they lobbied to get this group covered — and paid for — by their parents. That took care of that group while Medicare takes care of the older group they didn’t want to cover. Now, the only the group left are middle-aged people who are getting fired left and right by employers, thereby getting dropped from coverage.
Individual plans? These are gawd awful expensive for anyone over 45 so most just drop coverage and pray they don’t get cancer or a heart attack. If the ACA was struck down, in ten years there would have been nobody left to buy health insurance.
Insurance companies know this.
The ACA gives them 20–30 years to transition their business model. Without it, they probably have fewer than ten years before they will all be frantically merging, trying to pool assets and mitigate losses. The argument against the individual mandate is being driven by the very wealthy, the very healthy and the already Medicare-serviced. Selfish pack of idiots.
You just need to be paying attention halfway with half a brain to figure this out. It just is not that hard. The morality of providing health care or the constitutionality of forcing us to pay for something does not even need to be part of the argument.
The business model is simply unsustainable, which is why health insurance companies needed the Federal Government to mandate purchase and fine those who didn’t. If the individual mandate is a tax as the Supreme Court said it was (it is) we should be paying into a public fund (singlepayer)not forced to bolster the profits of corporations.
Fair warning to anyone who wants to mis-quote me on this article for their own purposes and claim it is an argument against the ACA. Don’t.
Originally published at uppastryplate.wordpress.com on May 5, 2013.

The only time I’ve tried to wear one was when my health insurance company sent me one for free and promised a $200 Amazon gift card if I reached a certain number of steps. Since I walk everywhere anyway, I figured, What’s the harm? The stupid thing came detached and drifted off to oblivion on the very first day I wore it, and that was the end of that.

I Got a Better Job, But I’m Afraid My New Insurance Won’t Cover a Scheduled Surgery

Thought you guys or the readers might have some thoughts on this. I was headhunted and offered a position with better pay, a better bonus, and more interesting responsibilities than at my current one. The thing that’s stopping me is my insurance.
I have jaw surgery scheduled for six months from now, and I’m getting it because my current employer has great health insurance and I was pre-approved for every piece of two complicated operations. All I will pay is $250 for an overnight stay at a hospital.
I had braces/retainers/appliances as a kid, and although my teeth ended up straight, my upper jaw was narrow, and my teeth wore unevenly. Ever since I was 18 my dentists have told me to get jaw surgery, but it costs about $50K here in the Northeast. I am in braces again and was happy as a clam until I got this offer.
The new company uses BCBS rather than Aetna, my current insurer, and my surgeon and orthodontist would need to submit all the paperwork again. Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, BCBS cannot choose to issue a blanket denial due to it being a pre-existing condition, but there is also no guarantee that BCBS would cover the surgery. If they don’t, I can’t afford it on my own. I suppose I could take out a loan, but I don’t want to. — D.

D., if you decide to leave your job, you may be able to keep your current insurance plan via COBRA before opting into your new company’s health care plan. Via cobrainsurance.com:
Under COBRA, if you voluntarily resign from a job or are terminated for any reason other than “gross misconduct” you are guaranteed the right to continue your former employer’s group plan as individual or family health care coverage for up to 18 months, at your own expense. In many cases, your spouse and dependent children also are eligible for COBRA coverage, sometimes for as long as three years.
Maintaining coverage under COBRA will come at a higher cost to you, though it might be worth it since you know your plan will cover your surgery.
When you’re on COBRA, no longer will your employer be picking up a big chunk of the monthly premiums. You’ll be responsible for paying the full amount, plus an administrative fee of up to 2%. You’ll have to weigh your ability — and desire — to pay the extra expenses against your and your family’s need for health coverage and the financial dangers of going without it.
Essentially, under COBRA, you’ll be in charge of your share of the premium PLUS your employer’s share, and any administrative costs. Look into this to see if COBRA coverage is an option available to you.
You could also explain the situation to your new employer, who may be willing to cover the costs of the surgery if their insurance plan, for whatever reason, doesn’t end up covering the surgery. Tell them that you are interested in the position, but the thing holding you back at the moment is the surgery you have scheduled. They obviously want you to be a part of their company since they took the time to headhunt you. Perhaps they are willing to help you sort this out so that you won’t have to pay anything out of pocket. One good thing is that since it’s a non-life-threatening procedure, you can reschedule the surgery until you get this sorted out.
Perhaps there are readers out there who can speak more authoritatively on this health care issue! Please share your thoughts if you have them.
Photo: Specialty Hospital

Expansion is easier than standing up a new insurance carrier, but since you have to do it state by state it’s still a pain. The good news is that we love hard work and also challenges, so everyone’s happy ;)

When Your College Friend Becomes an Insurance Salesman: A Survival Guide
by E.A. Mann

I’d been out of college about nine months when a fellow alum and acquaintance contacted me to catch up and “buy me lunch.” Following my lifelong philosophy to never turn down a free lunch, I agreed. He wasn’t a close friend, but he was a fun guy, and we’d had some memorably fun nights out. I met him at a faux-Irish pub, and walking in there I was thrown off by his tailored, professional look. You have to understand, this is a guy we’d nicknamed “dirty guy” before we knew him because we saw him at the dining hall after a rough night and it looked like he’d emerged from a kind of primordial party fissure deep within the earth.
Lunch started off well, but fifteen minutes in he got very serious and said something like “you’re starting to make some money, have you thought about securing your financial future?”
I quickly realized that I wasn’t having lunch with a friend. I was getting an insurance pitch! This is so common. No less than four friends and one wife (mine) have relayed similar stories to me, so there’s a good chance this has happened to you. We all followed the promise of free soup in a bread bowl only to be served cold canned financial information.
If you’re still in college, this will likely happen to you after graduation (the probability nears 1 if your college has a business school). The best I can do is to prepare you for some of the products this person might try to sell you.
• Term Life Insurance. This is the simplest product in your acquaintance’s distressed leather satchel. You will pay a small amount of money to the insurance company monthly, and if you die, the insurance company will pay a lump sum to your beneficiary. The term implies the length of the agreement; a twenty-year term locks in your monthly payments for twenty years, meaning that they can’t increase your monthly payments if you become ill. After twenty years, you walk away without anything to show for it (except, you know, still being alive). Term insurance is a completely legitimate product, and it’s usually cheap. As a healthy young adult, I pay roughly $20 per month for a quarter million dollar plan. But if no one relies on you for income, you don’t need insurance. I didn’t get this insurance until I got married.
• Roth IRA. Many insurance companies also offer to manage your Roth IRA, which is a retirement account with large tax benefits. Everyone who can afford a Roth IRA should have one; they are decidedly not a scam. But this company’s Roth IRA might be. In long term investing, fees can seriously eat into your investment’s value, and an insurance company that sends a person to your house is guaranteed to have higher fees than a low-overhead, dedicated investing operation like Vanguard, Fidelity or T. Rowe Price. But overall, having a Roth IRA with an insurance company is better than no Roth at all.
• Whole Life Insurance. This is where the obfuscation begins. I vaguely remember being sold whole life insurance as a kind of life insurance on steroids, and that to choose term insurance would be like choosing roast beef over steak. Charts and graphs were brandished. Income streams were promised. Confusing tax terms were conjured. But in reality, whole life insurance is just life insurance with forced investment tacked on. I’m just giving a rough estimate here, but a whole life plan for the quarter million dollars I listed above would likely be closer to $130-$150 per month than the $20 I pay. A small amount would go toward the actual insurance, and the rest would go into an investment account with guaranteed minimum returns. It sounds okay on paper until you start looking into the nitty-gritty details. Every company is different, but all of these plans have some form of commissions, yearly fees, and early withdrawal penalties, and in general they feel like a piece of machinery that has been made complex on purpose in order to deceive. In almost every case, it would be better to buy term insurance and invest the remainder yourself in low fee funds from a dedicated investment house.
• Variable Annuities. Just no. I cannot think of a single reason you should buy one. They’re obscenely profitable to the seller, and are too complex for me to explain simply in a paragraph. If you avoid all products that fall into those two categories, you will go far in life. Since variable annuities are by far the most profitable product listed here, your acquaintance may try hard to sell these. If so, don’t bow to the pressure, and feel free to order another appetizer on his or her tab.
It’s important to understand that insurance companies hire large numbers of trainees out of college knowing that only a small percentage of them will survive. This army of post-collegiate insurance salesmen is on a Sherman’s March to prove themselves and keep their jobs. We can sympathize with them and wish them the best, but it’s important to recognize when social pressure is leading to bad decisions. Don’t let someone hamstring your future with a toxic product at what is essentially a financial Tupperware party.
I’m not trying to disparage insurance salesmen so much as alert you that when people are paid commission to sell products, healthy skepticism is crucial on your part. My story ends happily. My acquaintance is now a friend. I have my term insurance through him, and I had my Roth with him until I rolled it into a low-fee Vanguard account. I don’t blame him for the early withdrawal fee I paid; I honestly never would have started saving that soon out of college if he hadn’t shown up. I work with him where it makes sense for both of us, and there are serious benefits to having a friendly professional a phone call away in this age of web-only investing. There is one sad thing though, and it’s worth mentioning: he no longer buys me lunch.
Previously: “When It Comes to Your 401(k), Don’t Just ‘Set It and Forget It’”
E.A. Mann is an engineer and freelance writer living in Warren, R.I. He has a twitter account, but feels like an old person when he tries to use it.

Yes, the insurance market is definitely ripe for disruption. Great chart, thanks for sharing!

In-Depth Guide to Travel Insurance and Benefits: Chase Sapphire Reserve vs. Chase Sapphire Preferred
A definitive guide to travel protection and benefits for the Chase Sapphire Reserve and Chase Sapphire Preferred.
Want more articles like this? Subscribe to the AskSebby newsletter.
We recently wrote about how to use the Chase Sapphire Reserve Auto Rental Insurance and a few of our readers asked how the travel insurance and benefits from the Reserve and the Chase Sapphire Preferred differed. Let’s dive in!
For reference, here are links to the benefits guides for the Chase Sapphire Reserve and the Chase Sapphire Preferred.
Chase Sapphire Preferred vs. Chase Sapphire Reserve Travel Benefits
Points Earned on Travel
You earn points when you book travel like flights, hotels, and rental cars. With the Chase Sapphire Preferred, you get 2x per $1 spent. With the Chase Sapphire Reserve, you get 3x per $1 spent.
Redemption Value
When you book travel through Chase’s Ultimate Rewards portal, you can book flights for a discount. The prices are usually comparable to Google flights.
Points are worth 1.25 cents with the Chase Sapphire Preferred and 1.50 cents with the Chase Sapphire Reserve.
If you have points stored in your CSP account, you can transfer them to the Chase Sapphire Reserve Ultimate Rewards account (they transfer instantly) and redeem them for the 1.5o value.
The portal gets you good redemption value, but there are better (and worse) ways to redeem Ultimate Reward points.
Annual Travel Credit
The Chase Sapphire Reserve comes with an annual $300 travel statement credit that helps offset the hefty $450 annual fee.
According to Chase, “travel” is defined as:
“Merchants in the travel category include airlines, hotels, motels, timeshares, campgrounds, car rental agencies, cruise lines, travel agencies, discount travel sites, and operators of passenger trains, buses, taxis, limousines, ferries, toll bridges and highways, and parking lots and garages.”
The following do not count towards travel:
“Please note that some merchants that provide transportation and travel-related services are not included in this category; for example, real estate agents, websites or owners that rent vacation properties, in-flight goods and services, on-board cruise line goods and services, sightseeing activities, tourist attractions, merchants within airports, and merchants that rent vehicles for the purpose of hauling. In addition, the purchasing of points or miles does not qualify in this category.”
Global Entry or TSA Precheck Credit
Travel through airports often? Skip the security lines and spend more time in the airport lounges with TSA Precheck.
The Chase Sapphire Reserve provides a statement credit of $100 every 4 years for Global Entry or TSA Precheck credit.
The application fee for TSA Precheck is $85, and the application fee for Global Entry is $100.
Global Entry allows expedited clearance for pre-approved, low-risk travelers upon entry to the US. If you have a valid US passport, it makes sense to get Global Entry because TSA Precheck is included in the fee, as opposed to only TSA Precheck.
Foreign Transaction Fees
Most credit cards have a 3% foreign transaction fee when you make a purchase abroad. The Chase Sapphire Preferred and Chase Sapphire Reserve do not have foreign transaction fees, which make them great travel cards.
Trip Cancellation/Trip Interruption Insurance
Trip cancellation insurance reimburses you or your immediate family members for up to $10,000 for each trip if you can’t make a trip for a covered reason like serious injury, sickness, or severe weather.
Immediate Family Member means your Spouse or Domestic Partner and their children, including adopted children or step-children, legal guardians or wards, siblings or siblings-in-law, parents or parents-in-law, grandparents or grandchildren, aunts or uncles, nieces or nephews.
Just book the trip with the Chase Sapphire Preferred or Chase Sapphire Reserve, and you’re covered.
Lost Luggage
If you or your immediate family member’s checked or carry-on bags are damaged or lost by the carrier, you’re covered up to $3,000 per passenger.
It’s a bit harder to be reimbursed for this benefit because you’ll need to provide original receipts for the items that were lost.
Baggage Delay Insurance
If your baggage is delayed for more than 6 hours by the carrier, Chase will reimburse you for essential purchases like toiletries and clothing.
Items NOT covered:
Essential items not covered by Baggage Delay include, but are not limited to: 1) contact lenses, eyeglasses or hearing aids
2) artificial teeth, dental bridges or prosthetic devices
3) tickets, documents, money, securities, checks, travelers checks and valuable papers
4) business samples
5) jewelry and watches
6) cameras, video recorders, cellular telephones and other electronic equipment and their accessories other than charging cables for cellular telephones
In addition, this insurance does not apply to:
any loss of property caused by or resulting from, directly or indirectly, the commission or attempted commission of any illegal act by you or intentional act including but not limited to any felony.
any loss of property occurring when 1) the United States of America has imposed any trade or economic sanctions prohibiting insurance of any loss of property; 2) there is any other legal prohibition against providing insurance for any loss of property; or 3) in the event of a declared or undeclared War.
Trip Delay Insurance
The Chase Sapphire Preferred requires the trip to be delayed for 12+ hours before trip delay insurance kicks in. The Chase Sapphire Reserve only requires 6+ hours.
You must purchase the tickets for the trip using one of the cards, and you’ll be reimbursed up to $500 per purchased ticket for lodging and meals.
Emergency Evacuation/Transportation
In the event of a medical emergency (illness or injury) that results in an emergency evacuation, the Chase Sapphire Reserve will reimburse you up to $100,000.
The fine print: it acts as secondary coverage. You will be eligible to receive coverage for expenses not paid or payable by your medical insurance or other reimbursement.
The duration of the trip can’t be less than 5 days or exceed 60 days. The trip also has to take place more than 100 miles from your place of residence.
The evacuation must be pre-approved by the Benefit Administrator, so call the number on the back of your card to check if your situation is covered.
Airport Lounges
The Chase Sapphire Reserve comes with access to over 1000 airport lounges around the world through Priority Pass.
This is an awesome perk because lounge access usually costs $50/person without a pass.
Curious to know what the best (and worst) Priority Pass lounges are? Check out our analysis here.
Auto Collision Damage Waiver
Chase Sapphire Preferred vs. Chase Sapphire Reserve Auto Rental Collision Damage Waiver
Primary Coverage vs. Secondary Coverage
In 2014, the Chase Sapphire Preferred updated their Auto Collision Insurance to act as primary coverage, as opposed to secondary.
This is AWESOME because most credit cards like the Amex Platinum and Citi Prestige act as secondary insurance. This means they will only pay for the cost of certain damages not covered by your personal car insurance policy.
The Chase Sapphire Preferred and the Chase Sapphire Reserve both act as primary coverage so your personal car insurance won’t be affected.
Exotic Vehicles
Exotic vehicles like Aston Martin, Bentley, and Porsche are excluded from the Chase Sapphire Preferred.
If you are renting an exotic vehicle, be sure to use the Chase Sapphire Reserve.
If the vehicle exceeds $75,000 in value, then it might make sense to buy the car rental agency’s car insurance so you aren’t stuck with a bill in the case of an incident.
Roadside Assistance
The Chase Sapphire Preferred charges $59.99 per service call. Services included are 24 hour roadside assistance for limited towing, lost key, and gas replacement.
These services are free for Chase Sapphire Reserve card holders, up to $50 per event. You can only use this benefit 4 times a year.
Want more articles like this? Subscribe to the AskSebby newsletter.


Gaming apps take risk out of car insurance
Baseline Telematics helps insurers understand customer driving habits before issuing policies
A leading developer of telemetric solutions for the insurance industry, Baseline Telematics relies solely on cloud infrastructure to deliver its innovative offerings.
“Our solutions are 100 percent cloud hosted,” says president and chief executive officer Paul-André Savoie. “Insurers don’t have to worry about supporting the workloads or data required for running our systems.”
The company creates usage-based platforms to meet a broad range of customer needs, from gauging the performance of young drivers to managing fleets of municipal snow plows. “Our secret has always been verticals,” Savoie says. “We tap into niche markets to help insurers underwrite risk more effectively.”
The increasing ubiquity of mobile devices in recent years presented Baseline with the opportunity to serve insurance markets in a whole new way. “We create mobile apps that serve as the telemetry device on customer smartphones and capture data on driving behaviors,” Savoie says. “We’re finding that this is what insurers really want to go to market with — they want to launch an app as a game for customer download and gather data ahead of introducing their insurance programs.”
“Users unlock badges and medals for driving safely in all kinds of conditions,” he adds. “No speeding, hard braking or over accelerating. We can also see things like whether drivers are slowing down when approaching traffic incidents. Every month, there’s a ranking board and leaders win different prizes.”
Information collected through the apps is invaluable for insurance companies in creating policies and reaching out to potential customers. “Actuaries have baseline data to use in assessing risk,” Savoie says. “Plus, insurers have all of the users captured as leads in their CRM systems. The app turns into an insurance sales tool.”
As demand for its insurance innovations continues to grow, Baseline must quickly and agilely deliver them to customers around the globe. “Many insurance organizations worldwide require dedicated, in-country hosting,” Savoie says. “The SoftLayer cloud platform is the perfect global solution for us.”
With SoftLayer hosting infrastructure, Baseline is launching new projects for insurance customers throughout Australia, Asia, Europe, North America, Latin America and New Zealand. “It only takes about an hour to set up a SoftLayer bare metal server environment for a new customer,” Savoie says. “That’s the easiest part of delivery. We just spool it up and turn it on.”
“Every customer we work with has a different business plan and is in a different market,” he adds. “SoftLayer gives us the flexibility to pick and choose which parts of our platforms are applicable from one organization to the next, quickly deploy them and work closely with the customer to deliver a fully customized solution.”
The cloud delivery model allows Baseline to move rapidly in targeting new opportunities worldwide. “Insurance prices in Malaysia used to be government mandated, but now insurers can set their own rates,” Savoie says. “There’s a huge appetite now for telematics solutions — it’s like the birth of the industry in that country. We have some exciting projects we’re working on there.”




Thanks To Obamacare, The Number Of Poor People Without Insurance Has Plummeted
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
The Affordable Care Act has significantly reduced the number of low-income Americans going without health insurance, according to new federal data examining the first full year that the health law extended coverage to millions of people.
Previous studies have suggested that, thanks to Obamacare, the national uninsurance rate has dropped to record lows. But the National Health Interview Survey, which is conducted by researchers at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, delivers perhaps the most trusted data on the country’s recent health policy changes. This particular survey has been administered for more than five decades and is held up as a gold standard among researchers in the field.
The National Health Interview Survey concluded that, among U.S. adults between the ages of 18 and 64, “for every poverty status group, a significant decrease was seen in the percentage who were uninsured between 2013 and 2014.” During that time period, which marked the beginning of Obamacare’s major coverage expansion, the uninsurance rate for Americans defined as “poor” and “near-poor” both saw sharp drops of at least seven percentage points:
CREDIT: National Center for Health Statistics
Americans who are not considered poor — in other words, families of four living on an income greater than $47,700 — saw a much smaller gain. Among that group, the unsinurance rate declined about 2.5 percentage points.
The divide in the data reflects the fact that the Affordable Care Act was specifically designed to extend coverage to struggling people who were previously locked out of the insurance market. Previous enrollment data has suggested the law is successfully narrowing the gaps among the demographic groups that have historically struggled to access health care, like African Americans, low-income people, and women.
Before health care reform, poor Americans were more likely to lack coverage to begin with — so it makes sense that they’ve had more to gain from Obamacare, which extends financial assistance to help people either enroll in public insurance or purchase a plan on new state-level marketplaces. If every state had agreed to expand Medicaid, a major tenet of Obamacare that was ruled optional by the Supreme Court in 2012, health experts say that low-income Americans’ advances would have been even more pronounced.
The latest data from the National Health Interview Survey was released just days before the Supreme Court is poised to weigh in on another major policy included in the health law.
If the plaintiffs in King v. Burwell are successful, the government will no longer be allowed to offer tax subsidies to help Americans purchase insurance in 34 states across the country. That outcome would suddenly render millions of people unable to afford to the cost of their plans, sending the insurance market into chaos and undoing much of the progress that Obamacare has accomplished so far. Recent surveys have found that the vast majority of Americans on both sides of the political aisle do not want the justices to eliminate those subsidies.

McCain’s Health Insurance Plan Would Not Cover Child Featured At Campaign Event
Our guest blogger is Adam Jentleson, the Communications and Outreach Director for the Hyde Park Project at the Center for American Progress Action Fund.

Today at a campaign event, Sen. John McCain (R-AZ) toured Miami Children’s Hospital and met with some of the facility’s young patients. As The New York Times reported, McCain heard the story of Jake, a 9 year-old child with a cleft palate. Cleft palates can be fixed with a simple operation, but as Jake’s father told McCain today, his family has been struggling to get their insurance company to cover the post-operation therapy Jake needs.
While Jake’s father related his story, McCain “nodded intently” –- but failed to tell him that Jake would not get coverage under his health care plan.
As we have documented on this blog, John McCain’s plan would not guarantee coverage to people with pre-existing conditions — a category that includes Jake, as well as anyone with cancer, diabetes, or even hay fever.
In fact, under McCain’s plan, insurance companies would get much broader latitude than they currently have to decide who to cover and who not to cover. Since people with pre-existing conditions are expensive for companies to cover, they’d get left out in the cold.
They wouldn’t be the only ones. McCain’s plan is a radical assault on the employer-based system of health care, and would leave many of the 158 million Americans who get health care through their jobs at risk of losing coverage. But people with pre-existing conditions — people like Jake — would be worse off than most.
In the Times article, McCain advisor Douglas Holtz-Eakin ducks the simple question of whether McCain’s plan would guarantee coverage for Jake, saying only that McCain would address the issue in his speech tomorrow.
We will be watching closely for some “straight talk” on this issue, because so far, it’s been way too serpentine.
UPDATE: Covering the same exchange, the Wall Street Journal also pointed out that “left unsaid was that McCain’s health plan is designed to weaken state regulations like the one in Florida that, like 14 other states, mandates that insurance companies cover treatment for cleft palates.”

One Way To Help People Stay Out Of Jail? Sign Them Up For Health Insurance.
Inmate Reginald Sanders undergoes blood dialysis at the California Substance Abuse Treatment Facility in Corcoran, Calif. CREDIT: AP PHOTO/RICH PEDRONCELLI
For the thousands of incarcerated Americans, prison may be the first place they’ve ever received comprehensive health care. But what happens after their sentence is up?
At least half of the inmates in America’s prisons and jails have some form of mental illness. Sixty-five percent have an substance abuse addiction. Behind bars, they may be able to get into rehab or start taking needed medication for the first time in their life.
But leaving prison can mean leaving behind this crucial health care coverage — something that can ultimately determine former inmates’ ability to successfully reenter the outside world.
At the end of April, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) tried to shine a light on this issue by releasing slightly updated Medicaid eligibility guidelines for former prisoners. In hopes of preventing dangerous gaps in medical coverage, the department urged state prisons to help inmates sign up for Medicaid prior to their release, and announced that those finishing their sentences in a halfway house are now eligible for Medicaid coverage.
It is important to understand the critical role access to health care plays in successful returns to the community.
“It is important to understand the critical role access to health care plays in successful returns to the community for so many Americans trying to change their lives,” said Richard Frank, HHS Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, in a press release paired with April’s announcement. The guidelines, he added, will help reduce the risk of former prisoner being “re-incarcerated or hurt.”
For HHS, a quick look at the numbers shows just how many inmates leave prison unprepared. More than 600,000 people are released from jails and prison each year — but a recent study found only 112,525 inmates were signed up for health care when they left prison.
For those with untreated health issues, the cycle only continues. If they don’t have any access to treatment in the outside world, they may start self-medicating with drugs and alcohol.
“Next thing you know, they’re caught for heroin possession, or commit a crime that facilitates their addiction,” said Ben Breit, the communications director for Cook County Sheriff Department in Illinois. “And then they’re back where they started.”
The consequences could be even more serious than that. A study of Washington state inmates, for example, found that during the first two weeks following an inmate’s release, their risk of dying was 12 times higher than other state residents. The leading causes? Issues that stem from a lack of proper treatment — like drug overdoses, heart attacks, and suicide.
Thanks To Virginia Reforms, These People Are Voting For The First Time In Decades
Justice by CREDIT: Emily Atkin RICHMOND, VA - Election Day is usually not a proud day for Wilbur Scott*. In past years…thinkprogress.org
Breit works under Sheriff Tom Dart, the man who led Cook County Prison’s transformation into the nation’s largest mental health provider, where security guards are required to have a background in medicine and inmates are treated as patients before prisoners. The caliber of care easily beats what little public health options exist for low-income or homeless people living in or around Chicago. In fact, according to Breit, “tons and tons of people” in the area intentionally commit crimes to receive health care behind bars.
Leaving prison with Medicaid coverage, Breit said, throws a wrench in that cycle.
“Medicaid enrollment is such an important step in this process,” said Breit. “Getting [former inmates] well, giving them a chance to thrive outside the criminal justice system… If we can successfully do this, we’re going to save hundreds, thousands — if not millions — of dollars on the back end in taxpayer dollars. They’re the ones paying for prison health care right now. It doesn’t have to be that way.”
Cook County Prison didn’t need HHS’ reminder to sign up prisoners for Medicaid. In fact, registering inmates for health insurance has been part of its prisoner intake process for three years. They enroll everyone in Medicaid coverage that will kick in when they get out.
It’s the high-risk period right after re-entry that makes or breaks someone.
Prison staffers have no idea how long incoming prisoners’ sentences will end up being. Some may be just staying for a night, some for five years. Either way, they’ll need health care when they leave.
“It’s not a silver bullet,” Breit said. “But the sooner we get their application in, the sooner they get their cards.”
This transition isn’t quite as smooth in other states. Illinois has an advantage because it expanded its Medicaid program under Obamacare to include those with incomes just over the poverty level. But in other states that have rejected Medicaid expansion, it’s often impossible to offer returning citizens an affordable health care plan right out of prison.
Virginia, where GOP lawmakers have so far blocked expansion from taking effect, is one of those states. There, 191,000 uninsured adults would be eligible for Medicaid if the program were expanded. And according to former inmates, prisoners aren’t aware of this coverage gap until they’re leaving prison — when it’s too late.
“They won’t get any information about health care through the Department of Corrections,” said Richard Walker, founder of Bridging the Gap, an organization that helps restore former inmates’ civil rights. “And when they leave, most are under the impression that they aren’t eligible for anything. It takes a community group to inform them of their options.”
Walker, whose advice comes from his own experience behind bars, often visits inmates in state prisons to inform them of their rights they’ll gain after leaving. Part of that includes explaining the harsh gaps in health coverage.
Obamacare Helped The Sickest Americans Gain Insurance, Huge Study Confirms
Health CREDIT: Shutterstock A new report released Tuesday from the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association underscores…thinkprogress.org
“I try to provide them with as much [information] as I can,” he said. “But they have a lot of barriers to overcome. It’s a systemic problem.”
While conservative lawmakers in states opposed to Medicaid expansion typically say the program would financially drain the state, closing this gap could actually save state dollars that currently go toward covering housing and health care for people in prison. Untreated health issues, especially mental disorders, only nudge state recidivism rates higher. In a 2010 Connecticut study of prisoner recidivism rates, researchers found the rate for those with severe mental health disorders to be “significantly” higher than that of other prisoners.
The amount of research on people’s health post-prison remains slim. Marc Stern, the former assistant secretary of Washington State Department of Corrections’ health services, said the most definitive research comes from data on people who successfully finish substance abuse treatment programs they began while incarcerated.
“You cut down on costs, recidivism rates, unemployment,” Stern said. “It’s the high-risk period right after re-entry that makes or breaks someone.”
Stern said that while he was with the DOC, prisoners had opportunities to sign up for Medicaid before leaving. But he knows it differs between facilities. Cook County’s Breit agreed, saying he wasn’t even sure what the policies are within local halfway houses when it comes to continuing care. This disconnect, Breit said, may be one of the reasons HHS decided to issue April’s reminder.
The government is trying to break down those walls to hold us all accountable for continuous care.
“We’re all so siloed in our own facilities,” he said. “I think the government is trying to break down those walls to hold us all accountable for continuous care.”
Colleen Barry, a professor at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, told Kaiser Health News that she sees HHS’ announcement as a type of “encouragement and a nudge” to states to improve the computers used for enrollment. “They understand that this is a technology issue,” she said.
But Breit said communication may be the end challenge.
“A sheriff’s duty, technically speaking, is to hold an inmate as long as you’re told by law. When it’s time to go, it’s ‘See you later.’ They don’t always have time to think of what’s next, or what other prisons are doing,” he said. “It’s about taking that extra step that can keep those folks from coming back.”

Ted Cruz Forgets To Sign Up For Health Insurance, Blames Obamacare
Republican presidential candidate, Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, speaks during a campaign stop Wednesday, Jan. 20, 2016, in Hollis, N.H. CREDIT: AP PHOTO/MATT ROURKE
GOP presidential candidate Ted Cruz says his family is no longer covered by health insurance, and he thinks it’s all Obamacare’s fault.
“I’ll tell you, you know who one of those millions of Americans is who’s lost their health care because of Obamacare? That would be me,” Cruz told the audience at a campaign stop New Hampshire on Thursday evening. “I don’t have health care right now.”
But the Affordable Care Act isn’t directly responsible for Cruz’s current situation.
Last year, the Cruz family signed up for health insurance through Obamacare’s state insurance marketplaces. (Thanks to a Republican-sponsored amendment that was introduced to prove a point about Obamacare, federal lawmakers and their staffers are required to enroll in these Obamacare plans if they want to maintain the government contribution to their insurance.)
Cruz’s family used to be covered through a PPO plan with BlueCross BlueShield of Texas. But for 2016, the insurer decided to eliminate PPO plans and move to offering only HMO plans on the individual marketplace (which is becoming a bigger trend in the insurance industry). The insurance company announced this decision last July.
The July announcement gave people enrolled in BlueCross BlueShield’s plans a full five months to select a new HMO plan if they wanted to maintain coverage into the new year. Ted Cruz’s family apparently just didn’t sign up in time.
At the campaign event on Thursday, Cruz joked that the lapse in coverage hasn’t gone over well with his wife Heidi — whose employer-sponsored health insurance used to cover the family until she left her job last spring to work on his presidential campaign.
“By the way, when you let your health insurance policy lapse, your wife gets really ticked at you,” Cruz said. “It’s not a good — I’ve had, shall we say, some intense conversations with Heidi on that.”
To get coverage beginning in March, the family has until the end of the month to select a new policy. Cruz indicated they’re working on doing that.
“We’re in the process of finding another policy,” Cruz, who once spent more than 21 hours filibustering funding for Obamacare, said. “I hope by the end of the month we’ll have a policy for our family. But our premiums — we just got a quote, our premiums are going up 50 percent. That’s happening all over the country.”
Some premiums for plans on Obamacare’s marketplaces have risen, but they haven’t skyrocketed by 50 percent. According to a new report from the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), the average Obamacare premium for 2016 plans rose about a 9 percent compared to last year.
Update:
In a reversal, the Cruz campaign now says that Ted Cruz’s family actually had insurance all along. Although their initial PPO plan did lapse, BlueCross BlueShield of Texas automatically enrolled them in another plan — known as a “health maintenance organization” plan — to keep them covered. Cruz just didn’t realize it. Even though the family does have some type of coverage, Cruz still plans on shopping around for a new plan that’s closer to the old one his family had.

This Restaurant Pays A $15 Hourly Wage With Health Insurance, A Retirement Plan And Paid Leave
The interior of Zazie CREDIT: JESSICA SPENGLER, FLICKR
Jen Piallat, the owner of Zazie in San Francisco, knows what it’s like to work in the American restaurant industry. “I worked on the restaurant floor for 30 years before I owned my own,” she said. “I didn’t have savings or health insurance until I was 35.”
The story is very different for her employees today. She had already offered them 401(k) plans with a match, fully funded health and dental insurance, and paid sick leave. And now she’s gone even further, getting rid of tips in favor of increasing pay and offering even more benefits.
At the beginning of the month, the restaurant increased its prices across the board by about 20 percent. She noted some restaurants that have done away with tips have added a mandatory service charge at the bottom of the check instead. “I didn’t want to do that,” she said. “I like the all-inclusive model…of everything, not just service, not just a tip, it’s also full benefits.”
Her servers’ wages, which were already about $15 an hour, will now raise by 2 to 3 percent. But those who work in the “back of the house” in the kitchen or busing tables will get at least a 30 percent increase. Servers will also get a share of profits, receiving 11 percent of their individual sales every day on top of their wages.
And while she offered paid family leave on an informal basis, she said she’s now added it officially to the books. “We have basically full benefits,” she said.
She anticipates the changes will make a big difference for her employees. “Housing is so expensive here,” she noted. Housing costs in San Francisco are up 6 percent over the last year and have risen in some neighborhoods by 50 percent over the last decade. Three years ago, she says, all of her staff lived in San Francisco proper, but now at least a third live outside the city. She also noted that most restaurant workers have no savings, just as she didn’t before opening her own up. But she says that combined, her employees have over $1 million in their 401(k) plans.
Her employees are enthusiastic about the changes. “One of my servers who had been reticent about it said, ‘Can I hug you, I feel great about it,’” she said. After the first day without tips, servers realized that they had more time freed up because they didn’t have to keep track of credit card slips and enter their tips into the computer system. And they’re able to treat customers better as well. One served a table of people with French accents, notorious for low tips given that tipping isn’t customary in Europe, but didn’t feel the pressure to serve other tables better because she might get a better tip. “She said it’s so nice to be totally welcoming and friendly to them and not have to have any concern,” Palliat said.
There is a chance she’ll end up losing money in the new system. “I’m five percent concerned,” she said. She’ll also have to pay more in taxes because what servers used to make in tips, which doesn’t get reported, will now be reported income. But she says it’s still worth it. “I don’t have a problem making a little less to even things out, make it a little more equitable,” she said. Plus the restaurant might benefit from slightly less business: she noted that there’s a consistent two-hour wait on weekends, which she’d like to bring down and might achieve it through people being turned off by higher prices.
She’s going to keep a close eye on profits. But, she said, “I’m definitely not going to ever decrease [the staff’s] percentage… If in six months our profit level has bottomed out, we’ll just have to increase prices.”
By doing away with tips in favor of a living wage, Palliat joins a movement of sorts. It began in high-end restaurants in New York and on the West Coast, but now has spread to lower tier restaurants in Philadelphia, Kentucky, Pittsburgh, St. Paul, Minnesota, and Washington, D.C. While Americans think that our system is a way to reward good service, research has found that in reality tips vary little based on a customer’s experience. Instead, they tend to change more based on appearance and race.
Being compensated through tips can also mean financial hardship for a lot of servers. It means they can be paid a lower minimum wage — the federal tipped minimum wage is just $2.13 an hour. While restaurant owners are supposed to make up the difference if tips don’t bring pay up to at least $7.25 an hour, many don’t. So people who work for tips end up twice as likely to live in poverty.

The Best Thing I Bought for My Trip Around the World Was Travel Insurance
by Lisa Findley

I dithered a little about buying travel insurance for my solo trip around the world. I’m young and healthy, and what’s an adventure if some bean counter has insured me against all the risks of taking the world by storm? I’d probably never need to make a claim, and then I’d have wasted that money, when I could have spent it on a mountain trek in Laos instead. Then again, I’m remarkably accident prone, and if I fell off a mountain in Laos and needed emergency evacuation, I’d be screwed without an insurance policy.
I planned to be on the road for a year, the realization of a dream a decade old. I bought a policy through World Nomads, a company that specializes in insurance for longer-term travelers. I could get the Standard plan or, for $30 more a month, the Explorer plan. I like to see new places, but I’m no adrenaline junkie, and I figured I’d just need the Standard, until I saw that snorkeling was under the same coverage as extreme activities like base jumping and parachuting. Snorkeling the Great Barrier Reef was on my agenda, so I became an Explorer. For $100 a month, I was covered for injury and illness, emergency evacuation, loss of luggage, canceled flights, and some liability on car rentals.
Was it worth it?
Absolutely. I got shingles in Australia, two concussions in New Zealand, an eye infection in Thailand, and stitches after being hit by a car in Vietnam. I went to one optometrist, three ophthalmologists, four general practitioners, and six hospitals. I went to at least a dozen pharmacies. I had to pay for it all out of pocket, yes, but I got receipts for every last thing and harangued doctors to type up medical reports. I provided proof of travel and swore that I didn’t have any other insurance that could cover me. I scanned everything at tiny copy shops in Byron Bay and Hanoi, and sent email attachments to the claims department of World Nomads.
It took ages to fill out the forms and put all the documentation together, but I’m glad I did. I spent almost $1,400 on doctors and drugs over the course of ten and a half months, and World Nomads reimbursed me every single penny. (I wish they were paying me to say that, but they’re not.) I don’t know how it would be if I’d been drunk when I’d had my accidents — I hear that’s a reason a lot of travelers’ injury claims get denied — but as it was, all my claims were paid in full. If I hadn’t bought the insurance, I still would’ve spent $1,200 on health costs, but I’d be out another $200, which got reimbursed because I took the safe route and bought insurance.
If I’d lost anything or missed a flight, the insurance would have covered that, too, and it was always a comfort to know that if I got really stuck somewhere, I’d paid some people in Pennsylvania enough to convince them to bail me out. Paying $1,200 up front was painful, but it would’ve hurt more to have been without travel insurance on this trip.
Nothing hurt more than those concussions, though. Those were the worst.
Lisa Findley has been injury-free for 33 days. You can read about her travels on Stowaway, at lisafindley.com.
Photo by NOAA’s National Ocean Service.

NBA’s Retired Players Will Finally Be Guaranteed Health Insurance
Earl Monroe, a member of the Basketball Hall of Fame who retired in 1980, needed a friend’s charity to afford knee replacements in the 1990s. CREDIT: AP PHOTO/BRANDON DILL
Retired National Basketball Association (NBA) players will receive health insurance throughout their lives under a players union proposal expected to be ratified by a player vote later this month.
The plan will reportedly tap $10 to $15 million per year from the players’ share of the nearly $3 billion that ESPN and TNT are paying annually for the league’s broadcast rights over the coming decade.
Many of the roughly 1,500 living former NBA players were out of the league years before the salary and endorsements explosion of the modern era. League rules mean that players are only covered for health insurance through the summer after the season in which they retire. When the league created a pension system for retired players, it initially excluded the handful of living players who’d left the league before 1965. It wasn’t until 2007 that the league extended full pension rights to that group, known as the “Pioneers.”
The health insurance idea would affect a much larger group of people who helped make the sport what it is today. Earl Monroe made it into the Hall of Fame 10 years after retiring in 1980. A few years after that induction ceremony, Monroe needed both hips replaced and had no insurance. A fellow ex-player stepped in and gave Monroe the money to pay for the hip surgeries.
Another uninsured former New York Knick named Harthorne Wingo found himself behind on rent and forgoing medical treatments he needed in 2004. The NBA has struck a partnership with a charitable doctors’ organization to try to address the needs of uninsured former players like Monroe and Wingo. But the strict cutoff on individual health insurance for retirees remains in effect.
Because the union’s normal revenues — membership dues from players and agents, and licensing money from video games and other outside-the-league uses of players’ likenesses — would likely be insufficient to furnish the insurance plan’s costs, players will have to forgo some of their share of that massive TV deal to fund the idea. Players are guaranteed roughly half of the league’s annual income tied to basketball, a category that includes stadium concessions and parking as well as ticket sales and broadcast revenues.
At current projections, the players’ half of the league’s nut will be close to $3 billion a year by the beginning of next decade. The $15 million upward estimate of the annual costs of insuring retirees is therefore a small drop in a growing bucket.
In addition to providing some economic security to the forgotten stars and sixth men of yesteryear, the players may be buying some useful negotiating leverage.
The TV deal inked last year means that the league’s salary cap will jump by almost 50 percent over the coming summers, an unprecedented jolt to the NBA’s delicate system for balancing players’ pay, owners’ wealth, and fans’ expectations of fairness on the court and relative continuity of rosters. The NBPA has already rejected the league’s first proposal to “smooth” the jump in the salary cap, pointing out that the people who actually play the games have already given up hundreds of millions of dollars under the most recent labor agreement from 2011.
Many pundits anticipate that owners will force a lockout again in two years rather than deal with the large projected jump in player pay. If there is another labor stoppage, the NBPA will hope that public sympathy for the players can steer talks in their favor. By voluntarily forgoing some of its side’s share of the league-wide revenue boom now to ensure that aging players can afford medicine and surgeries in perpetuity, the union may cut a more sympathetic figure in future labor fights.

Evesham Township School District Board of Education discusses rising health insurance costs
The board discussed remaining on the state health benefits plan versus attempting to switch to self insurance.

Like many across the nation, the members of Evesham Township School District Board of Education devoted a large portion of their recent meeting to discussing rising health insurance costs.
Board member Sandy Student first raised the issue when it came time to appoint insurance brokerage services to market the district’s health benefits insurance for the 2017–2018 school year.
Student said there was an increase this year of about 8 percent for the state health benefits plan of which the ETSD is a part, and he questioned whether the district might be able to save money through self-insurance outside of the state plan in the future.
“Last year when we spoke to the health broker, they told us that the state plan has no incentive to save money either for the district or the employees. I find that reprehensible,” Student said.
Student said the district’s health insurance costs had increased nearly $5 million since 2008, a cost shared between the district and its employees, and he asked his other board members to talk about the issue intelligently.
“The state health plan, having your employees in it, it doesn’t affect education. It’s a business decision. This is a black-and-white business decision, and our broker is failing us, and I would hope that we would not renew them,” Student said.
However, Superintendent John Scavelli Jr, said any broker the district could choose would be similar in shopping for plans for the district with all available health insurance options.
Scavelli said the issue was not whether the district was part of the state health benefits plan or self-insurance, but rather the district had a high loss ratio. According to Scavelli, the district’s loss ratio is about 95 percent, meaning 95 cents of every dollar the district spends on insurance goes toward claims.
Scavelli said insurance brokers have informed him in the past that they’re looking for a ratio closer to 85 percent to get better bids from other companies. When the district’s broker shopped for last year’s plan, Scavelli said health insurance carriers wouldn’t even bid on the district’s plan.
“We’re with Horizon through the state, but Horizon independently wouldn’t even bid it because they can’t give us a better rate than what we’re getting through the state. If they could, they would,” Scavelli said.
District business administrator John Recchinti echoed Scavelli, and noted that in 2013 the district’s insurance ratio was 88 percent, then 90 percent in 2014 percent and most recently 95 percent in 2015.
“Nobody is going to touch us because there’s not enough margin in there for them to make a profit, so they’re not going to take that chance, so we’re stuck with state health benefits. Unfortunately, that’s the reality right now,” Recchinti said.
Scavelli also noted the district used to be part of a smaller affiliation of schools in South Jersey for health insurance rather than the state, but the state plan eventually became a cheaper option and saved the district about $2 million when it switched.
“We have no allegiance to the state plan. We will go as long as it’s the same plan or better for our employees and our contracted agreements,” he said.
The board ultimately re-appointed Edward J. O’Malley and Gallagher Benefits Services as its broker.

The Cost of Getting Your Eyes Checked (When Your Health Insurance Does Not Include Vision)

Last year, I got my eyes checked for the first time since 2011 because I was suffering from a little eyestrain (diagnosis: too much laptop, not enough sleep, and I was able to fix one of those). When I went in, I got my eyes checked in this fancy new machine that took a photo of the inside of my eyeball, and from that photo I was also diagnosed with “a little extra intraocular pressure, maybe nothing, maybe one of the early signs of glaucoma.”
My prescription: never missing an annual eye exam again.
So I went back yesterday afternoon. The exam cost $139.30, except they also wanted to know if I would be willing to pay an extra $45 to get my eyes tested in that same fancy machine that used a “highly sophisticated procedure” to find the early signs of glaucoma. I figured that I should pay the extra $45, since one of the reasons I had made the appointment was to ensure my “maybe nothing maybe glaucoma” hadn’t actually progressed to “glaucoma.”
It hadn’t. In fact, this optometrist, who was a different optometrist than I had seen last year, seemed completely unconcerned about my intraocular pressure (even after I asked him to check). The last optometrist had put me through a series of tests to ensure none of my peripheral vision had started to degrade, and I had diligently conducted similar tests over the course of the past year. Can I hold my arms out at either side and still see them in my peripheral vision? Absolutely.
This optometrist also warned me about the dangers of “too much laptop” without really specifying what the dangers were. At this point, my 11-inch MacBook Air is my home office, my television, my shopping mall, my “living room where I hang out with friends,” and my “cocktail party where I flirt with potential dating options.” If I close the laptop, I can either read a book, scrub the floor, stare at a wall, or pay money to go sit in a bar or movie theater somewhere. It’s staying open.
But we both confirmed that it was about time to update my prescription and get new glasses, and so I started the awful process of trying on a hundred different frames while a helpful salesperson says “those look great!” after nearly every one. This always makes me anxious, because I feel like everyone else in the room is just waiting for me to hurry up and choose already. I am very picky about my glasses.

These are my power colors. What are yours?
At one point, the salesperson said “those look great!” and I said “but they don’t match my clothes or my jewelry,” because I read Tom and Lorenzo’s blog, I know what my power colors are, and I know that I need to find glasses that are both in harmony with my usual dark blue/slate/black ensemble and also on trend.
And then I found them. The Lafont Lucrese 675. Trendy thick frames with a slight cat-eye shape, since apparently we’re moving back to bigger frames now (I could seriously have purchased Sally Jessy Raphael glasses if I had wanted them) and both blue and brown tones.
“Those look great!” the salesperson said. “They cost $414.”
At that point I wanted to bang my forehead against the mirrored wall and ask “does everything cost some ridiculous amount of money these days?” Glasses should cost no more than $150. My health insurance program should give me at least some kind of discount on my eye exam and my new frames. (I asked if they could run my card, just to make sure there wasn’t any kind of discount hiding in there, and there wasn’t.) I should be able to earn $60K/year and live in a one-bedroom apartment.
It just makes you feel like the cost of life is insurmountable.
I mean, what I’m going to do is use that laptop I’m not supposed to stare at to conduct some price searching and go to a place like SmartBuyGlasses and grab the Lafont Lucrese 675 frames for $182 plus the cost of lenses. So the cost of life isn’t really insurmountable. The cost of buying those glasses from that optometrist’s office is more than I can afford. That’s all. Reframing the problem (PUN INTENDED) is the first step in finding a solution.
On the plus side, I did pay $184.30 to confirm that I do not have glaucoma, or at least not this year.

Connecticut State Insurance Will Cover Abortion As ‘Essential’ Health Benefit
By Annie-Rose Strasser

Connecticut residents who take part in their state’s health care plan will have access to full abortion services when the plan goes into effect in 2014, a state health panel decided last week.
The state’s decision means that elective abortions — all abortions, not just those in the case of health risks, rape or incest — count as an essential health service. This has already sparked debate in Connecticut, and will likely prompt more conversations about abortion services across the country. But the measure passed easily through Connecticut’s health board:
In Connecticut, every private health insurance plan already covers elective abortions, said Victoria Veltri, the state’s healthcare advocate. However, for this new essential benefits plan, the state must create a model — using the state employee plan, the federal employee plan or a private plan — for what is required to be covered. […]
Connecticut is ahead of others on making this decision, members of the state panel said Friday.
“It’s a matter of health. We wanted to protect a woman’s right to chose,” said Veltri. “I didn’t suspect that this would be an issue here.”
As states set up exchanges to comply with the Affordable Care Act, they will make similar choices about which services will be considered “essential” and therefore covered under the statewide plan.
Abortion services may seem contentious on the surface, but it is important for states to include. Women for whom an abortion is not affordable end up with the option of paying huge costs out of pocket for the procedure; some women even attempt dangerous self-induced abortions, leading to further health complications.
A lack of access to abortion services also tends to fall back on state residents anyway, through the costs of an unintended pregnancy.

Fox News’ John Stossel Blasts Federal Flood Insurance Program, Plans To Collect His Money Anyway
By Igor Volsky

Fox News’ John Stossel railed against the National Flood Insurance Program during an appearance on Fox & Friends on Thursday, blaming the government for encouraging people to build homes in high-risk areas and arguing that private companies should take over the practice.
During the segment, Stossel showed pictures of his own beach front property and explained that while he supported repealing program, he did purchase its coverage and planned to collect its benefits. The contradictory position stumped conservative guest host Peter Johnson Jr,. who couldn’t understand why the longtime libertarian would voluntarily benefit from a governemnt program he opposes:
PETER JOHNSON JR: Wait a second. That are not on the beach that, are not on river fronts that are blocks in that never anticipated that the ocean would come, that the bay would come. They paid their premiums. They’re not rich people like you were. If you’re so rich, why don’t you give the money back? […]
STOSSEL: Why was the federal government selling it? I blame the politicians. We don’t have special car insurance for Lindsay Lohan. … I paid the premium. I’m going to take the money. Of course you’re going to take the money. […]
STEVE DOOCY (HOST): You know John, I know you collected three times from the federal government, it was an absolutely great deal…
Watch it:

The federal government established the National Flood Insurance Program in 1968, after private insurers deemed the peril of flood “uninsurable.” The NFIP provides direct coverage for properties and contracts with some 90 private insurers, who mostly service insured properties but bear no insurance risk.
Private insurers were always reluctant to cover floods, noting that they couldn’t possibly “earn excess premiums to cover their cost of capital (they have to pre-fund losses), whereas the U.S. government can easily borrow money to cover catastrophic flood events after they occur.” Unlike private companies, the government can also require homeowners in flood hazard areas to purchase insurance, thus mitigating the problem of adverse selection, wherein only high-risk homeowners buy coverage.
The program has failed to discourage construction in storm-vulnerable areas — it had required county and local governments “to enact zoning and building rules to reduce construction in flood-prone areas” — and in some cases even “paid to have some homes rebuilt multiple times.” Stossel’s beach front house has been rebuilt at least three times — much of it using the federal dollars that he is paid to oppose on television.

Yes. I assume you mean that if car insurance companies are too quick to settle, those settlements result in higher insurance premiums for everyone.

MEMO: Health Insurance, Banking, Oil Industries Met With Koch, Chamber, Glenn Beck To Plot 2010 Election
By Lee Fang

In 2006, Koch Industries owner Charles Koch revealed to the Wall Street Journal’s Stephen Moore that he coordinates the funding of the conservative infrastructure of front groups, political campaigns, think tanks, media outlets and other anti-government efforts through a twice annual meeting of wealthy right-wing donors. He also confided to Moore, who is funded through several of Koch’s ventures, that his true goal is to strengthen the “culture of prosperity” by eliminating “90%” of all laws and government regulations. Although it is difficult to quantify the exact amount Koch alone has funneled to right-wing fronts, some studies have pointed toward $50 million he has given alone to anti-environmental groups. Recently, fronts funded by Charles and his brother David have received scrutiny because they have played a pivotal role in the organizing of the anti-Obama Tea Parties and the promotion of virulent far right lawmakers like Sen. Jim DeMint (R-SC). (David Koch praised DeMint and gave him a “Washington Award” shortly after the senator promised to “break” Obama by making health reform his “Waterloo.”)
While the Koch brothers — each worth over $21.5 billion — have certainly underwritten much of the right, their hidden coordination with other big business money has gone largely unnoticed. ThinkProgress has obtained a memo outlining the details of the last Koch gathering held in June of this year. The memo, along with an attendee list of about 210 people, shows the titans of industry — from health insurance companies, oil executives, Wall Street investors, and real estate tycoons — working together with conservative journalists and Republican operatives to plan the 2010 election, as well as ongoing conservative efforts through 2012. According to the memo, David Chavern, the number two at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and Fox News hate-talker Glenn Beck also met with these representatives of the corporate elite. In an election season with the most undisclosed secret corporate giving since the Watergate-era, the memo sheds light on the symbiotic relationship between extremely profitable, multi-billion dollar corporations and much of the conservative infrastructure. The memo describes the prospective corporate donors as “investors,” and it makes clear that many of the Republican operatives managing shadowy, undisclosed fronts running attack ads against Democrats were involved in the Koch’s election-planning event:
— Corporate “investors” at the Koch meeting included businesses with a strong profit motive in rolling back President Obama’s enacted reforms. Several companies impacted by health reform, including Allan Hubbard of A & E Industries, a manufacturer of medical devices and Judson Green, a board member of health insurance conglomerate Aon, were present at the meeting. Other businessmen at the meeting, like Omaha Burger King franchiser Mike Simmonds, are owners of fast food stores which have fought efforts to provide health insurance to their employees. Many corporate attendees of the meeting represent the financial industry impacted by Wall Street reform. For instance, attendee Bill Cooper is the CEO of TCF Financial, a corporation involved in the mortgage banking industry. Cooper recently filed a lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of Wall Street reform. Other financial industry players in the meeting hail from firms ranging from Bank of America, JLM Investment, Allied Capital Corp, AMG National Trust, the Blackstone Group and Citadel Investment. Annie Dickerson, a representative of Paul Singer, a powerful hedge fund manager who also gives tens of millions to Republican causes, was present. In addition, Koch Industries itself has a hedge fund and other financial derivative products in its portfolio of interests, which include oil pipelines, coal shipping, asphalt, refineries, consumer goods, timber, ranching, and chemicals.
— Corporate “investors” at the Koch meeting included businesses with a strong profit motive in preventing progressive reforms promised by President Obama. Several executives at the meeting have an incentive to stop Democrats and President Obama from addressing climate change and enacting clean energy reform. The meeting included oil executives from Aspect Energy, Murfin Drilling, Anschutz Company, GeoPark Holdings, Smoky Oil, and several members of Koch’s various subsidiaries. The meeting documents explicitly state that funding efforts to curb “climate change alarmism” were discussed.
— Fred Malek, Karl Rove’s top fundraiser for his $56 million attack ad campaign against Democrats, attended the meeting, along with leaders of other secret attack groups. Heather Higgins, who leads the Independent Women’s Forum, a shadowy group that has spent millions of dollars in attack ads on health reform, attended the meeting. So did Gretchen Hamel, a former Bush flak who now runs an attack ad group called “Public Notice,” which denounces spending programs.
— Participants collaborated with infamous consultants who specialize in generating fake grassroots movements, as well as experts on how corporations should take advantage of Citizens United. One session, about how to “mobilize citizens for November,” involved a discussion with Republican strategists Tim Phillips and Sean Noble, anti-union leader Mark Mix, and longtime Koch operative Karl Crow. Phillips — a veteran astroturf lobbyist who previously managed a deceptive grassroots lobbying campaign to help the Hong Kong-based Tan family maintain their forced abortion sweatshops in the Mariana Islands — now leads the day-to-day operations of Americans for Prosperity, the group ThinkProgress first reported to have helped organize many of the initial Tea Party rallies against Obama. Americans for Prosperity, founded and financed by David Koch, has a field team of over 80 campaign staffers spread out around the country, and additionally plans to spend $45 million dollars worth of attack ads against Democrats. Shortly before the planning meeting, Crow authored a campaign finance memo explaining that because of the Citizens United Supreme Court ruling, he advised specifically that the U.S. Chamber of Commerce’s 501(c)(6) and Americans for Prosperity’s 501(c)(4) can “now use general treasury funds to produce communications materials opposing or supporting specific candidates” and corporations can aggressively pressure their employees to vote a certain way.
The memo notes that participants in the 2010 election planning meeting “committed to an unprecedented level of support.”
Interestingly, the Koch meetings are managed by Kevin Gentry, an executive who doubles as a staffer in the Koch Industries lobbying office in Washington and as the key point person who helps deliver Koch charitable foundation grants. As ThinkProgress has documented, Koch Industries has dramatically boosted its own profits by using conservative front groups to manipulate public policy. The fusion between the “intellectual” conservative movement and big businesses opposed to regulations and accountability has a history in America dating back to the New Deal. During the thirties, the Du Pont family and other wealthy interests organized an assortment of “Liberty League” front groups to try to defeat New Deal agenda items and repeal President Roosevelt’s Social Security program. Now, corporations fund groups like the Heritage Foundation and the American Enterprise Institute — both had representatives at the Koch meeting — to further their lobbying agenda. The American Enterprise Institute even changed its name from the New Deal-era American Enterprise Association to try to dispel the notion that they were nothing more than a glorified business trade association.
As the memo states, Beck has addressed this regular gathering of conservative corporate executives in previous years. Past Koch meetings have included various Republican lawmakers, including DeMint, and Supreme Court Justices Clarence Thomas and Antonin Scalia as speakers.
After ThinkProgess published its exclusive investigation of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce revealing that the Chamber has been actively fundraising from foreign corporations for its 501(c)(6) account used to run a $75 million attack ad campaign, Chamber lobbyists found common cause with Beck and many of the conservative talking heads. Shortly after our investigation, Beck hosted an on-air fundraiser, asking his audience to give to the Chamber. Casual observers might have been surprised by the Chamber’s swift alliance with Beck (Chamber executives appeared on the Beck radio program and sung Beck’s praises on the Chamber blog), who has compared Obama to Adolf Hitler and called the President a “racist” who has a “deep-seated hatred for white people.” By telling his listeners to give money to the Chamber, Beck, who owns a media company worth more than $32 million dollars and an experimental Mercedes Benz, essentially told his working class viewers to give their wages back to their employers. However, Beck never disclosed his long working history of discussing political strategy with America’s largest corporations. The Koch memo clearly shows that Beck has been collaborating with the Chamber, as well as other titans of industry, for years. In his latest appeal for support to the Chamber’s foreign-funded trade association, which already counts JP Morgan and ExxonMobil as dues-paying members, Beck yesterday told his audience that the Chamber simply “defends the little guy.”
Click below to view a letter inviting corporate executives to attend the next Koch meeting in January, along with a list of the sessions held by Koch for the last meeting in June of 2010. An attendee list of the June, 2010 meeting is attached at the bottom of the document:

CAPAF interns Salvatore Colleluori, Riley Waggaman, and Ben Kaldunski contributed to this post.
Some of the donors at the Koch meeting were longtime Bush fundraisers, like Cintas Corporation CEO Dick Farmer and wholesale executive Art Pope. However, many names appear to be relatively new to conservative movement “investment.” Click below for a listing of the attendees
Name(s)IndustryNotes Jack and Rose Marie AndersonFinanceCulver Corp, Rose Marie and Jack R. Anderson Foundation- Financial Advisor Neil Anderson and Amy Fisher-Smith Runs Rose Marie and Jack R. Anderson Foundation Phil and Nancy AnschutzInvestmentIndustrialist, Owner, Weekly Standard, Examiner newspapers Cliff AsnessInvestmentAQR Capital Management Nate and Lynda BachmanFinanceThe Bachman Group-Financial Advisor Whitney BallThink TankOwner of a firm that helps corporations give anonymous gifts to front groups Michael BaroneMediaFox News Frank and Kathy BaxterBankingAmbassador Frank E. Baxter is Chairman Emeritus of Jefferies and Company, Inc., a global investment bank focusing on mid-cap companies. Steve and Betty BechtelEngineeringOwns the Bechtel Group (Corporation), Largest engineering company in United States Glenn BeckMediaFox News Bernard and Margaret BlasingameManufacturing President and owner of Aqua Dynamics Systems, Inc Alan and Lisa BoeckmannOilCEO Fluor Corporation Boysie BollingerShipping/CommerceChairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of Bollinger Shipyards Patrick and Paula BroeReal EstateFounder and CEO of Denver-based real estate asset management firm, The Broe Group Arthur BrooksThink TankPresident, American Enterprise Institute David and Ann BrownThink TankHeritage Foundation John Bryan Bob and Martha BufordOilC. Robert Buford has been President and owner of Zenith Drilling Corporation Tim Busch Shelby and Nell BushEnergyVice President, Legal and Administration — Hillwood Energy Tim CarneyMediaPolitical Columnist, Washington Examiner Charlies and Marla Chandler David ChavernLobbyistExecutive Vice President and COO at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce John ChildsInsuranceChairman and CEO of J.W. Childs and Associates Paul and Lea Clifton Runs Robert and Marie Hansen Family Foundation Susie CoelhoeMediafounder and CEO of Susie Coelho Enterprises Inc. Bill Cooper and Kristin TollefsonFinance/BankingCEO of TCF Financial Dino and Joan Cortopassi Joe CraftCoalJoseph W. Craft III is president, chief executive officer and director of Alliance Resource Partners LP Alex CranbergEnergyAspect Holdings, LLC — Chairman Jeff CrankAmericans For Prosperity / Radio PunditAFP State Director Karl CrowPolicy AnalystCapital Research Center Eric Crown and Isabella KingTechnology SalesSell Technology Equipment Kevin CrutchfieldCoalKevin S. Crutchfield serves as Chief Executive Officer of Alpha Coal Sales Co., LLC. Ravenell and Beth Curry Jim and Shirley DannenbaumEngineeringMr. Dannenbaum, Chairman of Dannenbaum Engineering Corporation Veronique de RugyThink TankSenior research fellow at the Mercatus Center Rich and Helen DeVosBusinessFounder and CEO of Amway Annie Dickerson BusinessCBRE analyst Ned and Nancy Diefenthal Jim and Dorothy PattersonOilGulf Stream Petroleum Dan and Kellie PetersNon-for ProfitDaniel S. Peters is president of the Ruth and Lovett Peters Foundation in Cincinnati, Ohio Tom PetrieBankingCo-founder of BofA Merrill Lynch Petrie Divestiture Advisors Dixon and Carol DollTechnologyCo-Founder and General Partner of DCM Karl and Stevie EllerAdvertising Ron and Kris EricksonRetailRonald A. Erickson is the Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of Directors of Holiday Companies Melvyn and Suellen EstrinNatural GasDirector of WGL Holdings INC Dick Farmer Peter FarrellBiomedFounder of ResmedBob KohlheppManufacturing/ServicesVice Chairman, Cintas Corp.Charles KrauthammerMediaWashington PostJim and Zibbie FerrellFuel OilFerrellgas Partners, L.P. engages in the distribution and sale of propane and related equipment primarily in the United States. Dave FettigNatural GasTank Craft, Duracraft Fuel energy Bob FettigNatural GasTank Craft, Duracraft Fuel energy Steve FettigNatural GasTank Craft, Duracraft Fuel energy Jerry and Nanette FingerBankingManaging Partner, Finger Interests LTD Richard FinkKoch IndustriesDirector of Georgia-Pacific, EVP of Koch Industries Budd and Lauri FlorkiewiczManufacturingFoam Fabricators Charlie and Kaye Lynn FoteFinanceFounder and Chief Executive Officer, Fotec Group LLC Randy and Jean FoutchOilChairman and Chief Executive Officer, Laredo Petroleum, Inc. Foster FriessInvestmentMr. Foster Stephen Friess is the Founder and Chairman of Friess Associates, LLC Steve and Polly Friess Jerry and Leah FullinwiderEnergy/PetroleumVice Chairman, Hillwood International Energy, L.P. Richard and Leslie GilliamCoalRichard Gilliam has been President of Cumberland Resources Corporation since 1993. Susan GoreThink TankFounder, Wyoming Liberty Group Oliver and Carolyn Grace Jr.Med and TelecomPresident and chief executive officer of Anderson Group, Inc., Judson and Joyce GreenEnergy and MedMr. Judson C. Green is the President and Chief Executive Officer of NAVTEQ Corp. Ken and Anne GriffinInvestment BankingFounder and CEO of Citadel Investment Group Gretchen Hamel Fred and Jane HamiltonOilMr. Frederic C. Hamilton served as the President, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of BHP Petroleum, Hamilton Oil Company and various Hamilton Oil Corporation subsidiaries and affiliates Bob and Mary Sue HawkCommunicationsPresident of Hawk Communications Dick and Ethie HaworthRetailHead of Haworth Furniture, Multi-national corporation, 3rd largest corporate furniture company in US Robin and Barbara HayesGovernmentFormer NC Congressman Dan and Carolyn HeardManufacturingExecutive Officer of John H. Carter Co., Diane HendricksManufacturingHusband of Ken Hendricks Steve and Regina HennessyAuto SalesAuto Sales James and Heather HigginsThink TankIndependent Women’s Forum Paul HillOilPaul J. Hill serves as the Chief Executive Officer and has been President of Harvard Developments Inc. since 1978. Mr. Hill serves as the Chief Executive Officer and President of The Hill Companies. John and Joan HotchkisEducationBoard of Directors for Teach for America UC Berkley Allan and Kathy HubbardChemicals and ManufacturingFounder and Chief Executive Officer, E & A Industries, Inc. Stan and Karen HubbardCommunicationsExecutive Chairman, Chief Executive Officer and President, Hubbard Broadcasting, Inc. Ethelmae HumphreysThink TankCato Institute Manley and Mary JohnsonPolitical Consultant Merritt Johnson Gerry and Priscilla O’ShaughnessyOilGerald Eugene O’Shaughnessy Co-founded Geopark Holding Limited in 2002. Michael O’ShaunessyTechnologyPetters Consumer Brands, LLC develops consumer electronics and appliances. Tim O’ShaughnessyMediaHungry Machine, Inc., doing business as LivingSocial.com, is a social discovery and cataloging network. Marshall Johnson Kyle and Kirsten Johnstone Mike and Beth KasserReal EstatePresident, Holualoa Inc Ken and Randy KendrickEducation/TechnologyChairman, Datatel Phil and Joanna KerpenAdvocacy Group/Think TankVP of Policy, Americans for Prosperity Gerry and Kathryn KingenRestauranteurRed Robin, Happy Guests Int’ll Scott KirkpatrickInvestorTeton Capital Charles and Liz KochKoch Industries Chase and Annie KochKoch Industries David and Julia KochKoch Industries Elizabeth KochKoch Industries Bob and Cindy KochKoch Industries Bob KohlheppManufacturing/ServicesVice Chairman, Cintas Corp. Dennis KuesterBankingRetired CEO of M&I; Bank Andrew KupersmithConsultantMD, Cardiology Consultants Andre LacyInvestmentChairman, Lacy Diversified Industries Ken and Elaine LangoneRetailInvemed, Home Depot Jay and Sally LapeyreServicesLaitram Corp Ken and Frayda LevyInvestmentJLM Investment Mgmt Tom LoveRetailCEO, President, Love’s Country Stores Bob LuddyManufacturingPresident, Captive Aire Systems Fred and Marlene MalekInvestment ManagementThayer Capital Partners Elaine Marshall Homemaker Pierce MarshallAdministrative ManagementMAROPCO Preston Marshall Bill MayerHealth CareMD, Mayer & Cope Family Practice Glen and Diane MeakemBusiness SolutionsCEO, Freemarkets Inc. Ed MeeseThink TankHeritage Foundation Lew and Suzy MeibergenGoods/ServicesPresident, Johnston Enterprises/WG Johnston Grain Co Don and Deede MeyersAttorneySelf Employed Jerry and Caroline MilbankInvestment ManagementCEO/Principal, Milbank Winthrop & Co. Jack and Goldie MillerRetailCEO/President, Quill Corp. Mark MixAdvocacy GroupPresident, National Right to Work Committee Joe and Mary MoellerKoch IndustriesVice Chairman Steve MooreMediamember of the Wall Street Journal editorial board David MurfinEnergyPresident, Murfin Drilling Co. Walter and Suzette Negley Mina Nguyen Larry and Polly NicholsEnergyExecutive Chairman, Devon Energy Corp Sean NobleFront GroupAmericans for Prosperity Tim and Teresa OelkeAdvocacy Group/ConstructionTeresa — State Director of Americans for Prosperity, Tim — Crossland Construction Corp Eric O’KeefeFront GroupSam Adams Alliance Kurt and Nancy PfotenhauerMediaPresident of MediaSpeak Strategies/former political commentator on Fox News, CNN and MSNBC and former Senior Policy Advisor and National Spokesperson with the 2008 John McCain presidential campaign Tim PhillipsAdvocacy Grouppresident, Americans for Prosperity Ramesh PonnuruMediaNational Review magazine Art and Kathy PopeGoods/ServicesSenior Exec, Variety Wholesaler Russ RobertsAttorneyRoberts, Ashby & Parrish Corbin and Barbara RobertsonEnergyPresident, Quintana Minerals Corp Richard Roder and Karin Hsu Construction ManagementCEO, Cmt-Construction Management Gary and Kathleen RogersGoodsFormer CEO, Dreyer’s Grand Ice Cream Durk RorieManufacturingUnited Air Specialists Chris RuferGoods/ManufacturingMorningstar Company Peter Schiff and Martha O’Brien InvestorSchiff: Euro Pacific Capital Inc., Steve and Christine SchwarzmanFinancial ServicesCEO/founder, Blackstone Group Rick and Sherry SharpRetailFormer CEO, Circuit City Mike and Lin SimmondsServicesCEO, Simmonds Restaurant Mgmt Peter SmithServicesCEO, Service Group of America Dick StrongInvestment ServicesStrong/Corneliuson Capital Mgmt Michael SullivanInvestment ServicesCR Intrinsic Investors Ray and Ladeline ThompsonManufacturingPresident/CEO, Semitool Lynn TiltonInvestment ManagementCEO, Patriarch Partners LLC Dave and Melanie TrueOilPartner Steve TwistConsultantRose & Allyn PR Consultants Jim and Gayla Von EhrResearch/DevelopmentCEO, Zyvex Corp Rick and Debra WallerManufacturingOwner, Rollmeister Inc Peter WallisonThink TankFellow, American Enterprise Institute Bill and Sarah WaltonReal Estate Allied Capital Corp Lew and Myra WardOilWard Petroleum Corporation owns and operates wells. It engages in oil and gas exploration and production. The company was founded in 1963 and is based in Enid, Oklahoma. Dick WeekleyReal Estate Weekley Properties Fred and Susie WehbaReal Estate Bentley Forbes Real Estate Nestor Weigand and Darcy BuehlerReal Estate JP Weigand & Sons Real Estate Dick and Mary Beth Weiss Life InsuranceWells Fargo, Hawthorne Rances Howard and Rhonda Wilkins InsuranceDiversified Insurance Don and Sue Wills Oil Bob KohlheppManufacturing/ServicesVice Chairman, Cintas Corp.Bob KohlheppManufacturing/ServicesVice Chairman, Cintas Corp.Larry and Lorraine Winnerman Real EstateWin Win Enterprises Joe Woodford Earl WrightFinanceAMG Natinal Trust Karen Wright and Tom RastinEnergy/ManufacturingTom Rastin, vice president of marketing and engineering, Ariel Corp — Karen Wright, Ariel CEO Cliff and Susan YonceInvestment BankingGoldman Sachs Fred and Sandra YoungServicesDiversified Search, LLC provides senior-level executive and corporate board search services in the United States and internationally. It provides recruitment services for various organizations in consumer and industrial, education, not-for-profit, arts and culture, financial and professional services, business, healthcare and human services, life sciences, media and entertainment, sports and leisure, energy and utilities, private equity, retail, and technology and communications industries.

Under current SF law passed by our Supervisors, insurance is required. Several platforms, including Airbnb, include supplemental coverage with a reservation.
Thank you for your informed comment, Aram.

For perspective, I pay $500 for my health insurance plan. My weekly copay a for psychologists and psychiatrists add up to $80, and until a few years ago when my medications lost their patent I paid another $1000 for meds per month.
We are indeed a country lucky to have this access. But cost will always be prohibitive, especially to the underemployed or freelance.

How Health Insurance Impacts Prenatal Care
Exploring the maternal health crisis in the United States, starting with how health insurance impacts access to critical prenatal care. 

When a woman finds out she’s pregnant, the most important step she can take is to make an appointment with her provider, be that an OB-GYN or a midwife. High quality prenatal care is essential for supporting a mother’s and baby’s health, not only to monitor complications that might present themselves. More importantly, prenatal care links a mother to someone who has the knowledge and skills to support her and help her stay healthy throughout her pregnancy, labor and delivery, and postpartum period. Women who do not receive prenatal care are 3–4 times more likely to die than women who do receive prenatal care. Babies of mothers who do not get prenatal care are 3 times more likely to have a low birth weight & 5 times more likely to die than those born to mothers who do get care. The problem is — good maternity care in America is expensive and for women who are uninsured or underinsured, it’s a privilege, not a right. When pregnant women don’t have access to critical care at any stage of the process, it can lead to poor outcomes for mom and baby.
Insured, but under-insured
For some women with private health insurance, the cost of pregnancy-related health care might be free or relatively affordable and she can get all the care she needs, but that’s not the case for all insured women. Even after the Affordable Care Act mandated that all insurance providers cover maternity care, many women continue to fall through the cracks.
The Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF) says that one in three privately insured women reports postponing needed healthcare in the past year due to cost. These women are considered under-insured. Some can’t afford to buy fully comprehensive private policies and don’t qualify for Medicaid. High deductibles or out-of-pocket expenses might mean she can’t afford complete prenatal care or all the medical exams and treatments she may need to treat or manage chronic conditions. Since prices for care vary greatly from state to state, among different providers and even hospital to hospital, it can be nearly impossible to know what your healthcare might cost and therefore, what you can afford.
What about women with no health insurance at all?
KFF reports that as of November, 2013, approximately 19 million women were uninsured in America. Uninsured women are more likely to have inadequate access to care, get a lower standard of care when they are in the health system, and have poorer health outcomes. Compared to women with insurance, they’re two to three times as likely to forgo medical services due to cost. When some become pregnant, they enter into prenatal care in poor health or with untreated medical complications.
How does that impact maternal health?
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) states uninsured pregnant women receive fewer prenatal care services and are more likely to experience adverse outcomes such as pregnancy-related hypertension and placental abruption, low birth weight babies and higher rates of infant mortality, In addition, ACOG says that Inadequately addressing pregnancy complications may have disastrous long-term emotional and economic effects on families. Society may face unintended increased costs to provide medical services to care for children born to uninsured women who have pregnancy complications.
How do uninsured women get pregnancy-related healthcare?
Some visit free clinics and emergency rooms for urgent care or simply show up at the hospital when they go into labor. Many visit county health departments and apply for state-sponsored health insurance programs like Medicaid, then go on to receive prenatal care through public or private clinics. But many women face huge barriers that block their access to services, including inability to speak or read English or find translators and lack of transportation or childcare. Once they do get insurance, they often have trouble finding a doctor or midwife willing to accept their policy. That’s because payment to providers through Medicaid is drastically lower than what they receive through private insurance policies.
Jennie Joseph, CPM, midwife and the founder of Commonsense Childbirth, a prenatal care and birth center in Florida (and one of Every Mother Counts’ grantees) that provides services to all women, regardless of ability pay. She says the barriers for underserved women who come to her for prenatal care are simply too high for many to hurtle without hand-held support.
Jennie says, “It’s a ridiculous system that’s horribly broken. Here in Florida, for instance, patients have to sign up for a special Medicaid pregnancy policy that assigns them to a specific managed care HMO. Before they can apply though, they have to provide proof of pregnancy from a provider. A home test isn’t good enough. But in order to see a provider, they have to have insurance or money. Then they have to get through the application process, submit paperwork, wait for return phone calls and hope they’ll eventually find out they’re eligible for coverage. But what if they can’t get to the health department office or don’t have access to the paperwork or a phone to take calls? Then the process is dragged out even longer. Once they’ve been accepted into an HMO, they then have to find a provider wiling to take them, which is not easy. All the while, their pregnancies are progressing. Many women present at my clinic at 28 weeks, 32 weeks, desperately seeking care. One woman the other day was past due and said she needed a repeat C-section, but couldn’t find anybody to help her. It’s outrageous that women aren’t able to access healthcare in America and many women go without. They’re scared out of their wits for no reason other than we just don’t care enough to help them.
It’s issues like these that contribute to this dire statistic: Two women die every day in the United States from pregnancy and childbirth-related conditions. It’s challenges like these that Every Mother Counts and our supporters are working to solve.

Nine Facts That Prove Disability Insurance Isn’t A Giant Boondoggle
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
On October 6, 60 Minutes ran a report called “Disability, USA” that relied on anecdotes and misinformation to paint Social Security’s disability programs as wasteful and full of abuse. This comes just a few months after a report on NPR’s Planet Money created a similar picture. Both stories were quickly denounced by fact-checkers and disability advocates as not only misleading and inaccurate, but missing essential facts about the disability programs — they have high standards, low fraud rates, and the benefits are far from cushy. Here are the key facts to understand the Social Security disability programs:
1. The Social Security disability standard is the strictest in the developed world — and most applications are denied. According to the OECD, the U.S. disability benefit system is the most restrictive and least generous of all member countries, except for Korea. Fewer than four in ten applicants are approved, even after all stages of appeal. Beneficiaries have severe impairments and illnesses like cancers, congestive heart failure, kidney failure, multiple sclerosis, emphysema, and severe mental illness. Medical evidence is the cornerstone of the disability determination process, and in most cases, medical evidence from multiple medical professionals is required to establish eligibility.
2. Social Security’s disability programs are highly efficient and experience little fraud. The Social Security Administration’s administrative budget is equal to just about 1.4 percent of benefits paid out each year. The agency’s payment accuracy rates are incredibly high. After making program integrity a top mission, former Social Security Commissioner Michael Astrue, a George W. Bush appointee, estimated that fraud amounts to less than one percent of the disability programs. The agency’s watchdog agrees that fraud is extremely rare.
3. Growth in Disability Insurance was expected and is primarily due to demographics. The program’s growth was projected as far back as the mid 1990s. According to Social Security’s actuaries, most of the growth is due to demographics and other common-sense factors: the baby boomers aging into their high disability years; women’s entrance into the workforce in greater numbers in the 1970s and ’80s, making them eligible for Disability Insurance based on their prior contributions; and the rise in the Social Security retirement age, which means Disability Insurance beneficiaries continue to receive benefits for longer before converting over to retirement benefits.
4. Growth in the program has little to do with the recession. Experts at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities caution against overstating the role that the recent economic downturn has played in contributing to growth in Disability Insurance, and Social Security’s actuaries estimate that the recession accounts for just five percent of the program’s growth. While application rates tend to rise in down economies, they have a much smaller effect on award rates (the share of applicants who are found eligible to receive benefits). Reflecting that trend, award rates have declined significantly during the recent economic downturn, from 39 percent in FY 2007 to just 33 percent in FY 2011, suggesting that applicants for benefits who did not meet Social Security’s strict disability standard were screened out. A recent study by the agency’s watchdog looked at the 11 highest-unemployment states and found that while application rates had increased, award rates had dropped in all of them.
5. Few beneficiaries are able to work. According to data from just before the onset of the recent economic downturn, some 16.9 percent of disability beneficiaries worked at some point during the year. Of those who worked, fewer than 3 percent earned more than $10,000 during the year — hardly enough to live on. This comes as no surprise given that many beneficiaries are very sick, or even terminally ill — one in five male and one in six female Disability Insurance beneficiaries die within five years of receiving benefits, and beneficiaries are fully three to five times more likely to die than others their age. Further underscoring the strictness of the Social Security disability standard, even workers who have been denied Disability Insurance fare extremely poorly in the labor market. A recent study found that among people whose Disability Insurance applications were denied, the vast majority — 70 percent to 80 percent — went on to earn less than $1,000 per month. But for those who are able or want to try to return to work, Social Security’s disability programs are designed to encourage work.
6. Disability benefits are incredibly modest. Disability Insurance benefits average $1,130 a month, just over the austere federal poverty level for a single person, or about $35 per day. Disability Insurance typically replaces less than half of an individual’s previous earnings. Supplemental Security Income benefits average just over $500 per month, about half the federal poverty level and less than $17 per day. For most beneficiaries, disability benefits make up most or all of their income.
7. Social Security’s disability programs keep millions of Americans out of poverty and deep poverty. While Social Security disability benefits are modest, they have a powerful impact. Poverty rates are significantly higher for individuals with significant disabilities but who do not receive Disability Insurance, compared with individuals who have been receiving benefits for at least five years. Likewise, Supplemental Security income makes it possible for 3.4 million Americans to avoid poverty, and lifts millions more out of deep poverty (defined as half the federal poverty level).
8. Social Security’s disability programs are all most Americans have to rely on when illness or injury strikes. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, just one in three private sector workers have access to employer-provided long-term disability insurance, and plans are often less adequate than Social Security. Access is especially limited for low-wage workers — only 7 percent of workers making under $12 an hour have employer-provided plans. For the vast majority of Disability Insurance beneficiaries — about 71 percent — half or more of their income comes from Disability Insurance, and for nearly half of beneficiaries, 90 percent or more of their income comes from Disability Insurance. Most beneficiaries of Supplemental Security Income have no other source of income.
9. We can ensure Social Security’s long-term solvency without cutting benefits. As the baby boomers age into retirement, growth in Disability Insurance has already begun to level off and is projected to decline further in the coming years. The fact that the Disability Insurance Trust Fund will need to be replenished by 2016 is not a new development or an unprecedented one. Congress has “reallocated” payroll tax revenues across the Old Age and Disability trust funds nearly a dozen times, about equally in both directions, to account for demographic shifts — and the last time reallocation was performed (in 1994), actuaries accurately projected that reallocation would again be necessary in 2016. As it has in the past, Congress could reallocate payroll taxes across the two trust funds to ensure that both funds would remain solvent until 2033. Thereafter, several policy options exist for increasing revenue to ensure long-term solvency without cutting already modest benefits. Either modestly increasing the payroll tax rate or eliminating the cap on earnings that are taxed for Social Security, so that the highest five percent of earners pay into Social Security all year long like the bottom 95 percent, would ensure 75-year solvency for the entire Social Security system.

Blockchain Startup Inchain to Launch Initial Coin Offering (ICO) To Raise Funds for Insurance Products on Ethereum

A global team of leading Bitcoin and Blockchain developers is launching an Initial Coin Offering (ICO) to raise investment funds for a new insurance product called InChain, a platform for insuring assets stored at crypto-exchanges and wallets or more generally, a cecentralised insurance platform based on Ethereum smart contracts.
The InChain team plan is to first build Blockchain insurance products for the cryptocurrency community then expand into more comprehensive industry solutions for the general insurance industry within two years.
The project’s ICO is to kick off October 12 and open to all investors.
InChain is a decentralised insurance platform that mitigates risks associated with total or partial losses of crypto assets due to cyber attacks and hacks. They have placed Ethereum smart contracts at the core of the platform so it requires minimal human involvement and it implements insurance and insurance bond servicing mechanisms as smart contracts.
A key feature of the platform is that the insurance fund is managed in line with the principles of distributed autonomous organizations (DAOs). To manage the insurance fund efficiently and earn healthy returns for Inchain token holders — as well as to pay out bond coupons — a certain part of the fund is invested in various assets and ventures in accordance with the strategies approved by token holders.
All InChain token holders are eligible to propose and vote for investment strategies. The return on investments is to be allocated, depending on votes, as follows:
Dividends paid to token holders;
Reinvestments made to the investment fund;
Additional liquidity reserves placed in cold storages for paying out bond coupons and insurance compensations.
In addition, token holders may propose their own investment strategies and ask token holders to vote for those. If enough token holders support the proposals, the investments will be reallocated accordingly.
Everyone who purchases Inchain tokens during the ICO receives them to his personal account. Straight after the ICO completion, all Inchain tokens will be transferred to token holders’ wallets. There are two ways to access the tokens: Inchain web wallets or MIST Ethereum wallets. They will post detailed instructions for both options.
At the same time, they will launch the Inchain blockchain explorer and list the tokens for public trading at external cryptocurrency exchanges and will make their open APIs designed for Inchain token interactions available as well.

ICO DETAILS
Distribution: 100 million in total, 85 million distributed to users, 15 million for core activities. 
• 1 million for pre­ICO and post­ICO bounties; 
• 5 million for strategic partners, consulting and auditing; 
• 9 million for the development team; 
Initial Rate: No set rate; 85 million will be distributed based on the total amount collected. 
Discounts for early investors: 
• Day 1–7 20%; 
• Day 8–14 10%; 
• Day 15–21 5%; 
No discounts after Day 21.

The following mechanisms maintain the financial stability of the platform:
InChain transfers risks to investors by issuing insurance-­linked bonds. Investors take on the underlying risks and receive coupons as rewards.
The insurance funds are managed by token holders, who choose investment strategies through voting. Investment returns are spent on bond coupons and then dividends are paid to token holders.
“The basic principles behind InChain’s organisation and functioning are security and stability enhancement for cryptoeconomy in general, as well as heating up the world community’s interest towards Blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies,” the project’s founders Sergei Primachik and Dmitri Lazarichev said.
The platform would enable any cryptocurrency user to ensure their assets against hack, technological risks and other problems that may entail full or partial loss of the assets. Additionally, InChain offers investment options and governance of an insurance fund via a DAO.
Apart from creating tools to insure the risks, the team has elaborated a system of insurance crypto-token bonds. It enables any player of cryptoeconomy to invest by purchasing insurance bonds and receiving passive revenue in the form of coupon payments for obligations in exchange for taking risks in case insured events occur.
“InChain provides tools for two user groups: those who own cryptoassets, like Bitcoin or Ethereum, and wish to insure their risks; and those willing to invest their cryptoassets in order to gain profits from the investment,” the platform’s representatives elaborated.
With Inchain’s convenient and highly intuitive interface, users set desired insurance parameters, and the platform will generate the appropriate smart contracts. The contracts manage the insurance policies and any payments made on claims. Inchain insurance oracles constantly monitor insured events.
Inchain provides three types of analytics:
Insurance analytics for observing the number of policies issued, their durations, service providers and rankings, as well as overall market snapshots and news.
Bond analytics for watching the current states of initial and secondary markets, bond yields, rankings, maturity and durations.
Insurance fund analytics for assessing ROI on different portfolios, asset allocations and news within the insurance industry.
Their decentralised trading exchange provides a variety of investment opportunities for users who want to buy and sell bonds and efficiently manage their fixed-income crypto portfolios.
All Inchain token holders may proactively participate in managing the insurance fund. Instruments for transparent voting ease the process of reaching consensus.

To recap, InChain incorporates the following items:
Decentralization with smart contracts
Decentralised insurance as risk mitigation tool for cryptoeconomy
Insurance token bonds as investment tools
A DAO to manage the insurance fund’s investment activities.
Click here to go to the InChain ICO page
Click here to view Inchain Whitepaper
Click here to go to the Inchain announcement on bitcointalk.com

Deciding to Buy Renters Insurance

My actual apartment. The whole thing.
After I posted my 2015 budget, many of you suggested — and some of you strongly suggested — that I get renters insurance.
I argued back, to no avail, that my stuff has literally no value. The replacement cost of everything in my apartment might be:
— $1,000 for all non-electronic items (dishes, clothes, my $97.41 Sleep Master bedframe that is one step above a metal cot)
— $1,000 for all electronic items (Kindle, 11-inch MacBook Air, my HTC Evo phone that is currently dying but that I will use until it is properly dead).
Still, you said. Get renters insurance. What if you accidentally set your apartment on fire?
So today I am looking at various renters insurances.
I don’t want to type “renters insurance” into Google because I’m nervous about getting a bunch of sleazy companies who have SEO’d their way to the top of the search results. Instead, I will start with the one name I know off the top of my head: Like a good neighbor, State Farm is there.
State Farm’s website features Green Bay Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers along with, bafflingly, Saturday Night Live’s Hans and Franz. Apparently this is a thing. This is a thing that State Farm is doing to try to get people to buy insurance.

State Farm promises me they’ll give me a renters insurance quote in “5–10 minutes.” That feels like about 9 too many minutes, but I start answering the questions: name (why do they need my name?), date of birth, etc.
The second page of questions asks me for my SSN and the estimated value of everything in my apartment It also addresses me as “applicant,” which is a bit like a guy calling me his girlfriend when we only went on one date. I’m just looking for a quote, State Farm. Just a quote, and a summary of your coverage.
Sorry, State Farm. Time to try another insurance company whose name I can remember off the top of my head. The Snoopy one. MetLife.
MetLife’s renters insurance page contains plenty of footnotes, as if to remind us that there will always be fine print. If I want to get a quote from them, I need to call their number. Awwww, I don’t want to call someone on the phone. The Internet was supposed to save me from this. I will procrastinate on calling MetLife forever.
Next. Um. Geico? 15 minutes can save me 15 percent on car insurance and also maybe renters insurance?
Geico does offer renters insurance. Instead of making me estimate the value of everything in my apartment, they offer me the option of choosing increments of $5,000, with $5,000 being the smallest amount. When they ask me what type of apartment I’m living in, one of the drop-down options is “dorm/student housing.” Do kids get renters insurance on their dorm rooms these days?
The entire Geico quote process is hilarious. No, Geico, I do not own exotic animals or non-poisonous snakes. (They do not ask me if I own poisonous snakes.)
After about a minute of box-checking, Geico tells me they can give me renters insurance for $6.59 a month, to include:
— Up to $5,000 if there’s a fire
— Up to $1,000 if something happens in my apartment and I need to stay in a hotel (this did happen to me once in a previous apartment situation, and the landlord paid for the hotel)
— $100,000 personal liability coverage, if someone enters my apartment and gets hurt
And so on. There are a lot of interesting coverages in this list. For example, did you know that if you “borrow your friend’s expensive wine glasses and they break while in your care,” Geico will in theory pay for their replacement?
So it looks like I might be interested in this renters insurance package, but I need to do my due diligence and check in with Team Billfold Tough Love commenters. Do any of you have Geico renters insurance? Should I at least try to find one other insurance company where I actually get a quote, so I can compare things?
Or should I push the button on Geico this afternoon, get renters insurance, and rest assured that my furniture, my electronics, my friend’s expensive wineglasses, my seven poisonous snakes and I will be protected?

Without Insurance Coverage For Cannabis, Medical Marijuana Patients Dole Out Hundreds For Prescriptions
By Sy Mukherjee

Americans who use marijuana for medical purposes in states that permit it already face the uncertainties — such as DEA crackdowns and uneven drug law enforcement — that accompany their medication’s federally prohibited status. But patients in these states also bear the full weight of their medicine’s costs, which must be paid entirely out-of-pocket since health insurers have refused to go anywhere near coverage for medical marijuana prescriptions.
Since the federal government designates marijuana as a Schedule 1 controlled substance with no legitimate medical use, insurers and employer-based health plans stay away from cannabis — even though it is now legal for medicinal purposes in 18 states and the District of Columbia, and completely legal in Washington and Colorado. As Kaiser Health News reports, this perpetuates a system in which patients with legitimate medical need of the drug may have to spend up to hundreds of dollars a month to fill their prescriptions:
Health insurance rarely if ever covers [marijuana] use; some patients spend hundreds of dollars a month or more on the drug. The situation may not change anytime soon, some experts say. […]
A typical patient might purchase an eighth of an ounce — the equivalent of about three joints — from a dispensary at a cost of $20 to $60, says Kris Hermes, a spokesman for Americans for Safe Access. But patients’ needs vary widely.
“Some people only need a few hits at a time to experience a therapeutic effect,” he says. “Others need to smoke several marijuana cigarettes a day or ingest it with food, which takes considerably more.”
With many other medications, particularly those that are prescribed to a patient for long-term use, health insurance helps bring prescription costs down to $5-$10 per refill — a far cry from the range of prices paid by medical marijuana users. The federal government isn’t yet buying the argument that marijuana can have legitimate medical uses — despite some studies that have suggested otherwise — and insurers are following suit. But in the states where medical marijuana has been legalized, voters have electorally ratified their belief that cannabis can be a boost to patient health, particularly for Americans undergoing chemotherapy and other painful procedures.

How Online Giant Amazon Prevents Workers From Receiving Unemployment Insurance
By Pat Garofalo

If Congress doesn’t act, two million workers will see their unemployment benefits disappear at the end of the year due to the expiration of emergency measures put in place during the Great Recession. The expiration will be the first time Congress has ended federal benefits with unemployment so high.
But Congress is not the only entity standing between workers and the social safety net. According to a report by the Morning Call, online retail giant Amazon — via the contractors it employs to hire short-term workers — is preventing unemployed workers from accessing their benefits in an effort to drive down costs:
The pressure to keep costs down means many who take temporary jobs at an Amazon warehouse hoping it will result in long-term stability and independence instead find themselves jobless and fighting for a public benefit that represents their last financial resort.
The Morning Call attended 23 unemployment compensation hearings this year involving temporary Amazon warehouse workers hired by Integrity Staffing Solutions, including hearings for several employees who lost their jobs following illness or injury. Most workers were fighting for benefits of between $100 and $200 a week.
Advocates for the working poor say the company’s aggressive stance on unemployment compensation exploits low-wage earners who need the benefit for food, housing and other necessities while they search for other jobs. The workers are often outmatched in the unemployment process.
Unemployment insurance kept 2.3 million Americans out of poverty last year, and has the potential to create 300,000 jobs next year by pumping money into a weak economy. Unemployment benefits also discourage the long-term unemployed from dropping out of the labor force.

How The New Flood Insurance Reforms Make Costly Future Climate Disasters More Likely
CREDIT: FLICKR/CLICKERJAC
By Ari Phillips
On Friday, President Obama signed into law the Homeowner Flood Insurance Affordability Act, very aptly named as it helps homeowners living in flood zones afford their insurance rates. The only problem is that some homeowners just shouldn’t be living in flood zones, and their rising insurance rates were meant to reflect that. This is especially true in coastal flooding zones where rising sea levels due to climate change, extreme weather events and human-induced erosion and environmental degradation can make the risks outweigh the benefits, and the costs — for which taxpayers are liable — exceedingly high.
The bill comes two years after other recent reforms made to the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) which is overseen by FEMA. The 2012 bipartisan Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act was designed to make the NFIP more financially stable in part by phasing out long-instituted subsidies for high-risk coastal properties. Starting with Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and building up to Hurricane Sandy, which came a few months after the reforms, NFIP found itself completely fiscally insolvent, exhausting the premium-funded resources of FEMA and requiring around $28 billion in taxpayer-funded bailouts. After coastal property owners rose up to protest the increased insurance rates for living in a flood zone, with its latest action Congress has now bowed to short-term constituent demand rather than doubling down on confronting the long-term risks and costs of living in flood zones.
Part of the what the 2012 bill did to more accurately reflect risk was scale back subsidies for properties experiencing multiple or extremely severe floods. It also phased out subsidies for vacation homes and properties receiving grandfathered-in rates that no longer reflect their flood risk.
“Rolling back the earlier Biggert-Waters reforms and reinstating insurance subsidies is bad public policy,” wrote Rob Moore, Senior Policy Analyst for the Natural Resource Defense Council. “It sets back efforts to prepare for the impacts of climate change and is an over-correction for legitimate concerns about the affordability of flood insurance for people of limited means.”
Moore points out that only about a fifth of the properties, or around 1.2 million, covered under the NFIP are subsidized. The other 4.3 million homeowners already pay risk-based subsidies. “The recent actions by Congress benefits the small minority of property owners and makes it easier and cheaper to buy properties in the riskiest, most flood prone areas,” writes Moore.
Those 1.2 million people include folks like Lurie and Michael Portanova, lifelong residents of Jersey Shore, Pennsylvania. The Associated Press reported that their annual flood insurance on two buildings they bought in 2012 on banks of the Susquehanna River went from less than $3,000 to a minimum of $26,868. The recent Congressional reforms bring the rate back down to what it was, but allow it to continue to rise at nearly 20 percent a year toward that original risk assessment cost.
“There’s no way we can afford that. Just no way,” Michael Portanova told the AP. “We’d have to let it go back to the bank and walk away from it.”
CREDIT: “Moving Out of Harm’s Way” http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/green/report/2013/12/12/81046/moving-out-of-harms-way/
While many coastal properties belong to wealthy landowners and are overseen by profit-driven real estate firms looking to cash in on high values, there is a significant inequality issue that can be hard to fairly address in broad-reaching reforms. However, in the long-term the considerations change, especially in areas heavily prone to the impacts of sea level rise and potentially stronger and more devastating hurricanes that are bolstered by warmer ocean temperatures.
“This is an equality issue in the short term, but a moral issue in the long term,” said Shiva Polefka, an ocean policy researcher at the Center For American Progress, and author of an extensive report on coastal flooding called “Moving Out Of Harm’s Way”. “Keeping low rates for people in the crosshairs of climate change is hazardous, as the next devastating disaster could strike at anytime.”
There could have been ways to keep the helpful 2012 reforms of the Biggert-Waters Act while addressing the issues of inequality. For instance by issuing means-tested vouchers for low- and middle-income residents who couldn’t afford flood-insurance coverage at risk-based premiums, as noted in a 2013 issue brief from Resources for the Future and the Wharton Risk Management Center.
Even so, with so much personal and cultural attachment to many flood-prone residences that may go back generations and the issue already being in political crosshairs, flood reform may end up coming in more ugly, ad hoc and chaotic spurts as events such as Superstorm Sandy get more expensive and harder to justify paying for. Sandy cost more than $68 billion and caused the deaths of 117 Americans. With sea-level rise of several feet expected by the end of the century, storm surges like that caused by Sandy will become more likely, and more costly.
“For advocates of sustainable development, Biggert-Waters held out the hope that the longstanding promise of the NFIP — controls over rampant real estate development in hazardous terrains — could at last be realized,” wrote Scott Gabriel Knowles, an associate professor of history at Drexel University and author of The Disaster Experts: Mastering Risk in Modern America, in an op-ed for Slate. “Intense lobbying by homebuilders at the state level has a long history of thwarting local zoning restrictions:”
“And many governors and local officials were eager to hand out relief checks and spur a return to the shore after a flood rather than waiting for impact studies that might restrict post-disaster reconstruction. The weakened act is much less likely to slow down coastal development in flood zones, and that’s bad news for advocates of an aggressive climate change policy.”
Floods are already the number one natural disaster in the United States, with the NFIP paying more than $7.7 billion in flood insurance claims to all policyholders in 2012. A report from last year from consulting firm AECOM found that sea-level rise could increase the flood-hazard area in the country’s coastal floodplain by 55 percent by 2100. In the meantime, coastal populations continue to swell, having expanded nearly 40 percent since 1970 — with about 40 percent of the U.S. population living in a county with coastline.
Not only does this put more people in harm’s way, but it endangers sensitive ecological areas that play an important role in maintaining biodiversity and buffering against coastal erosion and devastation from storms.
“What we need to be doing is physically adapting the coastline to sea level rise,” said Polefka. “American coastal communities are perched on the tracks, and sea level rise is this freight train heading towards them. When we rolled back the recent flood insurance reforms, we’re basically telling people they don’t need to get out of the way.”

Missouri Becomes The First State To Expand Insurance Coverage For Eating Disorders
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
By Sam P.K. Collins
Even with a federal mental health parity law, people suffering from an eating disorder often struggle to get adequate coverage and get kicked out of their treatment early, due in part to insurers’ shallow understanding of the illness’ physical and mental properties and ambiguity about what qualifies as “medically necessary” therapy.
But that will no longer be the case in Missouri. Last week, Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon (D) signed a bill that explicitly states the types of eating disorder treatments insurance providers must cover. The new law builds on the mental health parity law by expanding the definition of “medically necessary” to include mental health treatment. It will also ensure that weight no longer serves as the sole determinant for whether someone may continues treatment. Insurance companies have until 2017 to implement the changes.
Years before the law’s passage, family members of Missourians receiving eating disorder treatment often complained of premature halts to treatment and high out-of-pocket costs for counseling sessions — which experts call essential in addressing the underlying mental health issues and preventing a relapse. Advocacy groups, like the National Eating Disorders Association (NEDA), applauded the legislative milestone and expressed hope that other states follow suit.
“The victory comes following a seven-year process, previously held up by insurance company opposition and cost concerns,” NEDA wrote in a press statement in May shortly after Missouri’s State House of Representatives approved the changes, outlined in Senate Bill 145.
“Many states have Mental Health Parity Laws in place, which in theory should require the coverage of eating disorders by insurance companies. However, because the laws are vague they are left up to interpretation by the insurance companies who continue to deny care. By defining what the Standards of Care Guidelines are for eating disorders, according to the APA, insurance companies would be less likely to get away with denying care,” the statement read.
Eating disorders — defined as any psychological condition characterized by abnormal eating habits — affect nearly 24 million people of various ages and demographics in the United States. The most prevalent disorders include anorexia, bulimia, and binge eating disorder, all of which may be fueled by a desire to control one part of an otherwise hectic life. Contrary to the beliefs of some, people don’t develop eating disorders suddenly; rather, the issue typically develops over time and in tandem with a depressive disorder.
If left untreated, eating disorders often lead to muscle loss or weakness, severe dehydration, tooth decay, inflammation of the esophagus and gut, and high blood pressure and diabetes. Experts say failing to address the mental health care aspect could lead the suicide of patient who may hate the weight that he or she achieved. Such urgency hasn’t convinced insurers to close that coverage gap. Today, only one in 10 people suffering from a mental disorder receive help. In that group, 35 percent enter a medical facility and 50 percent are diagnosed as depressed.
While the process of treating an eating disorder and addressing the mental health issues often varies between patients, experts say that stays in treatment centers usually amounts to at least six months. According to NEDA, the ideal plan for those suffering from an eating disorder combines medical care, mental health services, nutritional therapy, and a team of specialists — a primary care doctor, a therapist, a psychiatrist, and a dietitian.
The 2012 mental health parity law by itself couldn’t have taken into account the nuances of therapy, which allowed insurance companies to make their own interpretations about what constituted as “medically necessary” — perhaps out of a desire to save money. On its blog, the Gall and Gentry Law Group said that insurers often go to great lengths to minimize costs, even sending an independent medical professional to examine the patient’s physical progress and estimate a discharge date that fits insurers’ goals.
Advocates and lawmakers saw insurance companies’ efforts to stay in the black firsthand throughout the years-long negotiation process for the bill when they kept raising the issue of future cost burden. Though no formal analysis has been carried out to estimate the burden it would place on the private sector, proponents of the change say the costs to provide the treatment as outlined in the Missouri law should be minimal.
But Missouri State Sen. David Pearce (R), the sponsor of the bill, said that the legislative changes will ultimately lower costs by ensuring that insurance companies proactively act to prevent future hospitalization or death. He told MissouriNet.com that couldn’ have happened under the status quo.
“We have seen patients who have declined, and some who have even died,” Pearce said. “The patient going through eating disorders would be in a hospital or a residential treatment facility, and once they reach a certain weight then they were dismissed, or perhaps maybe their organs had started functioning at a certain level, then they were dismissed.”

How One Construction Worker Deals with Injuries Without Insurance

Walter White is a 40-year-old construction worker, and that’s not his real name. He doesn’t have health insurance, and hasn’t for years. We spoke recently about how that’s worked out for him.
Logan Sachon: You do construction work.
Walter White: Yeah, I’m an independent contractor, a mercenary, ha. I do everything. Some plumbing, some electric, any kind of construction, really.
LS: Which is a physical job.
WW: Oh yeah. I get hurt all the time. I get cut all the time. If I get cut, I use electrical tape, the glue seems to kill stuff, and it’s way cheaper than bandaids. Sometimes I’ll use those butterfly stitches if I need to, and then I’ll also use an antibiotic ointment. I get cut constantly. I’ve never stitched myself, though I did superglue a cut once.
LS: How’d that work out?
WW: Good. Healed up.
LS: How long have you been without insurance?
WW: I haven’t had insurance for six years. I had it for four years, and I didn’t have it for nine years before that.
LS: When you had it, did you use it?
WW: No. Never used it when I had it. Never needed to. Never got hurt, never got sick, never got a physical.
LS: Why didn’t you get a physical?
WW: Why would I? If nothing’s bothering me, I figure that’s good enough. There’s no limit to the amount of tests you could have run on your body. Sound like fun to you? You like tests?
Last week I had an infected hangnail, it was swollen with pus, and I had to open and drain that.
LS: Uh, isn’t that unsafe?
WW: It was already infected! I drained it with a hypodermic needle, which I didn’t have for drugs, I have never injected drugs, but I found out awhile ago that they’re the best thing for popping things. Though I also learned that you should never pop a burn blister.
LS: How’d you learn that?
WW: At the time I was emptying a pot of spaghetti water, boiling water, and my sink was filled with dishes so I decided to empty it into the toilet and some splashed on my foot. I was wearing these thick socks and so it took a second to take them off and by that point my foot was totally scalded. I got this blister on my whole foot and up my ankle, and I popped that. And that’s when I learned you don’t pop blisters.
LS: What happened?
WW: It took forever to heal. I couldn’t wear a shoe for long time. Had to miss work. But that was before, when I didn’t research on the internet. I just wanted to pop it because it was so big and uncomfortable. But it hurt a lot worse after I did. So that’s my health tip: If your burn blisters, let the blister stay there. But that wasn’t even the worst.
LS: That sounds pretty bad.
WW: The worst was, I used to wear kung fu slippers to work, which I now know was stupid. My boss should have never let me on the job site wearing those. I shouldn’t have worn them. But I was doing ladder work one day, drilling holes in this steel beam, flexing my feet. And I got off work and went to happy hour and was totally fine. But in the morning, I got out of bed and and fell on my face. I couldn’t walk at all, couldn’t put any weight on my feet, it so painful. Turns out I had plantar fasciitis, which is when tissue on the bottom of your foot is inflamed.
LS: How’d you figure that out?
WW: How do you think I figured it out? The internet. The internet is my doctor.
LS: Do you have a certain site you use?
WW: I don’t have one site I go to. I probably spent 30 hours researching the symptoms and reading boards and posts, to confirm what I had and what to do.
LS: So what did you do?
WW: I had to stay off my feet for a month until they healed. It was really bad. I couldn’t work at all, basically had to just stay off my feet completely. That was terrible pain.
After that I got kind of a boot fetish. I bought like 8 pairs boots, trying to find ones with the best arch support.
LS: How’d you live during that time, without working? Did you have savings?
WW: My boss gave me some money because I wasn’t working. I didn’t do workman’s comp or anything. He just gave me some money to get by.
LS: Was there a treatment? Exercises you could do?
WW: No my feet just had to heal on their own. But when I tore my rotator cuff in a karaoke accident, I did a therapeutic exercise from the internet.
LS: Karaoke accident?
WW: It was kind of a stunt fall.
LS: So how do you treat a torn rotator cuff on your own.
WW: My whole treatment was based on the internet, and I ordered all my drugs from India. I used a pain pill that I learned about from a guy in Turkey.
LS: How much did it cost?
WW: Ordering from India was cheap. It was like $30 compared to $300.
LS: Do you go to the dentist?
WW: No. Once I busted my tooth in half. I knew my boss’s husband was a dentist, so I went to him. Instead of capping it he made a sculpture out of composite that he put on it. He charged me ten bucks. And last month I scratched my cornea, but my landlord is an optometrist and he took care of it for free. It’s all about connections, Logan. The more friends you make the more doctors you’ll know.
LS: Why don’t you go to the county clinic, or the free clinic?
WW: I go to the free clinics for venereal diseases only. I’ve just had chlamydia twice. But I do get tested, yes. It’s been years, but I’m a monogamist. The last time I got an HIV test the guy sat down and was like, “We’ll, I’m sorry to tell you, the test is negative.” I could have killed him.
LS: I don’t believe that happened.
WW: Why would I make that up.
LS: Well than that was extremely unprofessional. That’s never happened to me and I’ve never heard of that happening. And I have friends who administer HIV tests, and they’re always professional, trained.
WW: I’m sure they are. But he was giving me a dose of my kind of humor, so I took it.
LS: So are you worried about getting sick? Like, really sick?
WW: That’s the other thing about not having insurance. You can’t be a hypochondriac. You’ve gotta trust in your body to take care of yourself. I personally know people who are always looking for something that might be wrong with them. I’m kind of doing the opposite of hypochondria. Just trying to keep a positive mental attitude. I figure that will help my health. I’m living in la la land. (laughs)
LS: You do workout, in addition to your job.
WW: Yeah I do yoga everyday, for mind and body. Preventative care.
LS: But you also drink a lot.
WW: Life is full of contradictions.
LS: I know there has been some cancer in your family. Is that something you think about it?
WW: I’ve thought about it. I”m thinking about it now that you mention it, but I’m not worried about it. I’m not worried about it at all. Worry is a man with a hung head carrying a sack full of feathers he thinks is lead.
LS: What is that from?
WW: An ex-girlfriend’s dad told it to me, but it goes way back. I don’t know how far back it goes.
LS: What would you do if you had persistent stomach pain?
WW: Research on the internet. Change my diet. It would take a lot to get me to the hospital.
LS: Has your family tried to get you to go to the doctor?
WW: Sure. Lots of people have.
LS: But you don’t go.
WW: Why would I. Like I said, there are an infinite number of tests. Why start. But people should do what they want to do. I don’t make any judgments on what anyone else does. Some people probably can use medical care.
LS: What if you could get insurance for free or low cost?
WW: Of course I’d accept free insurance. Low cost would have to be pretty low cost since I’m pretty much broke right now. And I’m sort of living off the grid right now. My income is not steady. Sometimes I have a bunch of money and sometimes I have no money. I don’t want to have a boss and I don’t want to work for anybody but myself and a client, a client’s enough. I could take my old job back, but I don’t want it. I think I could do better on my own, ultimately. Once you’re committed to working for someone, you don’t have the same opportunity to do things on your own. You won’t have the time.
LS: Do you have anything else to say about health?
WW: I just wish everybody the best health. Good health and good luck to everyone. And we’re all going to die.
LS: Well, yes. But some sooner than others.
WW: Oh I totally agree. Can’t argue with that statement.

How To End Up With Oscar, “the Uber of Health Insurance”

STEP 1: Read something about a new approach to health insurance by and mostly for young people / millennials.
STEP 2: Retain a vague, positive impression of the company, which has a striking, unusual name, even if you can’t recall precisely what it is. Forget all relevant details.
STEP 3: Embark on a health insurance odyssey for your family. Your goal is to cover the three of you — two adults, one baby — for $850.
STEP 3.5: Think longingly of martinis. Shopping for health care is tedious and yet terrifying; a martini would probably help, but you’re a pitiful lightweight who barely drinks. Eat dark chocolate instead and try to focus on the task at hand.
STEP 4: Encounter, as an Obamacare option, Oscar. Think: Oscar? Oh yeah, I read about you! You’re the new kid on the block, right?
STEP 5: Read more press.
Under all its plans, Oscar allows its members unlimited free calls with physicians. The doctors are supposed to call back within an hour, but on average, calls are returned within seven minutes of being placed, says Mr. Nazemi. (Of course, many primary care physicians already provide this type of service to their existing patients.) These calls can provide a quick diagnosis and a prescription sent directly to a pharmacy for common ailments like pink eye and urinary tract infections. Oscar pays the physicians $40 a call, which is significantly less than it would reimburse for an office visit.
One individual who called had taken a tumble in the subway and wondered if his arm was broken, recall Oscar’s executives. Over the phone, the doctor took the patient through a range of motions and determined that the arm wasn’t broken. He advised putting an ice pack on it and seeing the primary care physician the next day. That saved the patient an expensive trip to the emergency room, Oscar’s founders said.
STEP 6: Seek out confirmation bias. Ask a friend if she’s heard anything about the company. Listen to her describe, with animation, how a friend of hers has had a really good experience with it so far. On the strength of that one anecdote about someone you yourself don’t even know, feel pretty certain that you will try Oscar.
STEP 7: Talk to your fella and ascertain that he, too, is intrigued by the idea of start-up health insurance disruptors related by marriage to Donald Trump.
STEP 8: Enjoy the novelty of surfing a health insurance company website that’s actually attractive and easy to use.
STEP 9: Check if your local hospital takes the insurance. It does. Check that the price for a couple’s coverage would be within the $850 budget. It is. Check the Internet for user reviews and pore over the responses on a relevant Metafilter thread, which include a phenomenally detailed spreadsheet of options and prices.
STEP 10: Decide what the hell, we’ve gone the mainstream route for health insurance in the past with mixed results; why not see what the new kids on the block are up to? Sign up for Oscar. Pay your first month’s premium online. Total amount spent on health insurance for three individuals: a hair over $850. Consider that a success. Heart beating a little too fast, lean back and wait to see what happens next.
This is Part II of a series, Shopping for Health Care. Stay tuned for Part III: Repercussions!

GOP Rep. Admits That Health Insurance Companies Control The Market And Dictate Medical Decisions
By Ben Armbruster
Today on C-Span’s Washington Journal, a caller told a story of how he was forced to see numerous doctors at different hospitals in the area in where he lives, some as far as 100 miles away, to get a diagnosis. The caller then faulted health insurance companies for preventing the practice of having “diagnostic tests done under one roof.” “So in essence,” the caller noted, “the insurance companies are the ones controlling what tests you can get, when you get them, how you get them and if they’re accepted or not.”
In a remarkable moment of candor, C-Span’s guest — Republican Congressman Tim Murphy (PA) — agreed:
MURPHY: Yeah and that brings up the point here that with regard to one of our big frustrations with insurance companies is they control the market place, they control what’s done, a lot of times doctors not making the decisions here. And you recognize the frustration.
Watch it:

Murphy is right: Insurance companies control markets and are the ones making medical decisions. Insurance companies have consolidated in local markets which has resulted in limited choice and higher profits. In fact, “1 in 6 metropolitan areas in a 2008 study of more than 300 U.S. markets is dominated by a single health insurer that controls at least 70% of consumers.” And as The Wonk Room’s Igor Volsky has noted, insurance companies try to cover only the healthy because offering care to sicker Americans puts them at a competitive disadvantage in the marketplace.
In order to preserve the status quo of keeping health insurance in the private sector, 
the GOP’s strategy has been to repeat the dubious claim that a public option “rations” care. But by making that argument, as Murphy pointed out, rationing care is just what these very same conservatives are supporting. Indeed, during her confirmation hearing in March, Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius said, “as insurance commissioner where I served for eight years saw it on a regular basis by private insures, who often made decisions overruling suggestions that doctors would make for their patients that they weren’t going to be covered.”
Transcript:
CALLER: Ah yes good morning representative. And I’m calling from Georgia and I had a short statement I wanted to give to you and then ask you a question about it.
MURPHY: OK
CALLER: And my question is based on, well now I’m not insured but I had been insured, I’m a teacher that was outsourced I guess you would say. I was diagnosed with post-polio last year but I had to bounce from one doctor in one hospital to another doctor in another hospital all of them within 60 to 100 miles of where I live in order to go through the procedures to get enough information so that I could finally go to a doctor, a PMNR, who could then diagnose that I had post-polio.
But there used to be clinics where you could actually go and get all the diagnostic tests done under one roof and there would be the variety of medical expertise there that would be able to also follow through and say this patient because of this test and this test has this illness. But because of the insurance companies, they are no longer able to do that and so in essence, the insurance companies are the ones controlling what tests you can get, when you get them, how you get them and if they’re accepted or not.
MURPHY: Yeah and that brings up the point here that with regard to one of our big frustrations with insurance companies is they control the market place, they control what’s done, a lot of times doctors not making the decisions here. And you recognize the frustration.

HealthTap Makes Virtual Care More Affordable and Convenient by Accepting Insurance as Payment
By accepting health insurance for consumers and automating reimbursement for doctors, HealthTap enables affordable access for consumers while decreasing physician claims costs by up to 55 percent
September 27, 2016 9:00am Eastern Daylight Time
PALO ALTO, Calif. — (BUSINESS WIRE) — HealthTap, the world’s first Global Health Practice providing 24/7 immediate access to doctors via video, text or voice, announced today that Virtual Consults on the HealthTap platform will now be covered by health insurance.
With the dramatic increase in demand for Virtual Care, patients are looking for a quick and easy way to check eligibility and enable insurance coverage. According to the American Telemedicine Association, more than 10 million patients took advantage of virtual doctor consults last year. A Harris Poll survey revealed that more than one in four U.S. consumers (27 percent) would choose a virtual consult if offered to them.
Even though the largest health insurers — including United Healthcare, Cigna, Aetna, and Humana — already cover certain forms of Virtual Care, the current process requires that either the patient or the doctor’s office call the insurer on a case-by-case basis to determine whether that Virtual Consult was covered. HealthTap relieves this burden by making the process of confirming coverage automated and therefore easy and immediate. Eligible patients can even receive free Virtual Consults in real-time with no co-pay, if their policy allows it.
This new, easy-to-use, integrated feature is available for doctors who have opted in to offer this additional payment method to their patients. When payment is due, patients can simply enter their insurance information and HealthTap checks their eligibility in real-time. HealthTap also automatically submits electronic insurance claims on behalf of doctors to payors, replacing an otherwise manual process for billing staff.
Because HealthTap will now submit electronic claims on behalf of doctors, HealthTap’s new technology can help save both providers and patients money and time. According to the American Medical Association, doctors can save an average of 55 percent ($23,126 annually) on insurance claim submission costs by using electronic submission instead of manual.
A recent study in the Annals of Internal Medicine noted that, for every hour physicians see patients, they spend nearly two additional hours on paperwork. By eliminating this burden of insurance red tape and bureaucracy from the healthcare equation, HealthTap cuts down the time doctors and their staff spend filling out forms, freeing them to deliver better care at a lower cost.
“When we started our journey six years ago, most people doubted the willingness of patients and doctors to exchange care and information digitally,” said Ron Gutman, founder and CEO of HealthTap. “Now, after we’ve served insights from over 103,000 doctors to hundreds of millions of consumers, it’s exciting to see how insurance reimbursements combined with advanced technology make Virtual Care convenient, affordable, and efficient. Today, we’ve made an important step towards fulfilling our vision and mission to provide everyone everywhere with immediate, easy, and affordable access to top quality healthcare.”
For more information on how to use HealthTap’s insurance feature, visit: www.healthtap.com/goto/insurance_launch
About HealthTap
HealthTap, a World Economic Forum Technology Pioneer, is the world’s first Global Health Practice. HealthTap delivers immediate, world-class healthcare 24/7 from Query-to-Cure™. Through video, voice, and text chat on any mobile device or personal computer, HealthTap connects hundreds of millions of people everywhere with the most trusted health advice from a network of more than 103,000 top U.S. doctors. HealthTap’s proprietary, robust, and secure Health Operating System (HOPES™) and proprietary triaging technology enable healthcare systems, payers, employers, and technology companies worldwide to provide the right care at the right time at the right price. Sign up today and download HealthTap’s free apps for iPhone, iPad, or Android at healthtap.com.
Contacts
Sloane PR
Michelle Peters, 212–446–1889
mpeters@sloanepr.com

A Last-Minute Guide to Buying Health Insurance
by Jesse Farrar

Note: This piece was originally published on Feb. 11, 2015, but we’re re-promoting this because it has a good explanation about what all these terms mean, and what you should be thinking about while you dive back into the exchange.
While the Affordable Care Act certainly has its detractors, 2014 was a good year for Obamacare. The self-employed, underemployed, or otherwise ineligible took advantage of the state and federal exchanges last year, and their participation drove the nationwide uninsured rate to its lowest ever. Insurance companies posted all-time high share prices in the third quarter last year thanks in part to an increased subscriber base provided by the law’s mandate. Healthcare.gov’s Marketplace is not as bad as you’ve heard. In fact, it’s pretty darn good. But the velvet rope is closing soon: The open enrollment deadline is February 15th.
The Basics
If you’re not quite sure what all the insurance industry-specific terms mean, don’t feel bad: My parents don’t know, secretaries at the doctor’s office don’t know, hell, the President probably doesn’t know. There’s really no reason to unless you’re in the process of shopping for insurance, which, ahem, you are, so right now you have to cram the information into your brain and push out some other stuff about Top Gun or your grandparents. But! It’s only temporary, so don’t worry. Hey, which guy is Goose again?
When you’re shopping for a plan, there are six basic factors that, when considered together, determine how valuable your plan is. They aren’t the only factors, unfortunately, but they’re the easiest things to sort by. Here they are in no particular order:
1. Premium — This is what you pay each month for the privilege of saying, snootily, “I am an insured person now, and I will have the hash browns and hot cakes at 10:31 a.m., protocol be damned.” Your premium, if you’re the head of a household like I am, is anywhere from a couple hundred to several hundred dollars a month. (Is any of this getting through? Look, it’s like…if you had 50 Netflix subscriptions. That make sense?) The premium is a fixed cost, meaning it’s the same every month for the whole year, so it’s tempting to make it your sole budget consideration, but you really can’t….
2. Deductible — …because of the deductible. The deductible is complicated, but people are probably familiar with how it works in the context of car insurance. Do you remember when you had that fender bender in college and the body shop said it would cost $5,000 to put your bondo-covered Buick Skylark back to (what you could imagine a Buick Skylark approximating, in its sad, puttery way) tip-top shape? Do you remember learning the hard way that having insurance isn’t like having a meal plan at the dorms? There are still out-of-pocket expenses for insured people, and the deductible is the big one. If your auto insurance deductible were, say, $2,500, then you’d pay every penny of that until the insurance company took over, right? And since $2.500 might as well have been the ark of the covenant for how available it was to the college-aged version of yourself, you decided to let the Skylark rot in a ditch.
In this analogy, your body is the Skylark. Sorry. But since you only have one body (some exclusions may apply), you can’t just let it rot! What you have to do instead is determine what a good deductible for you would be. It should be a number of dollars that you could conceivably dig up if you absolutely had to, but not so low that it makes your premium out of reach. Yes, if you want a $0 deductible, your premium is going to be very high. Keep that in mind.
Generally, the health insurance deductible is similar to the auto insurance version, but there are a few differences. In your favor is that you aren’t typically going to be swallowing the whole thing all at once like you would in the example of a car accident. Almost all of your out-of-pocket costs will go towards the deductible in a given year — excluding, notably, your premium payments and co-pays, which we’ll cover in a bit. On the other side of the ledger, if you are insuring multiple people, you’re going to have multiple deductibles to juggle: one for the family and one each individual. In my search, the deductible was somewhat less important than other factors because I knew I could pay it if an emergency arose, and because my family is relatively young/healthy. Unfortunately, there is one more key way in which health insurance differs from auto insurance.
3. Coinsurance — And it’s called coinsurance. The name is bad, and doesn’t tell you much. Co-insurance? The hell is that? I’m already buying insurance. That should be enough. Why, God, is one insurance not enough?!
But coinsurance is actually the number that describes the percentage split between the insurance company and the insured (you) paid on covered services after the deductible is met. Yes, you will probably be paying money to doctors in the event that you pay enough money to reach an arbitrary limit, which does not include all the money you spent on a recurring monthly basis, and which will reset at the beginning of a new year. You will always be paying money to doctors, forever, until the earth is finally flung out of orbit and we freeze instantly in the vacuum of space. Bummerville.
As an example, here’s how you might see coinsurance explained in a summary of benefits:

To the uninitiated, it may look like your insurance company is offering to pay 80% of the costs of a test (the number on the right is for out-of-network providers, which we’ll get to later), and that’s true to an extent. But that comes after the deductible is met, even if the summary doesn’t spell that out in every instance. If your individual deductible is $2,000, you’ve paid $1,500 in qualified costs so far, and your doctor has ordered $1,000 worth of blood work, you’ll be staring down the barrel of a $600 bill ($500 of remaining deductible + 20% of $500 remaining of $1,000 bill). Generally your portion will fall between 0% and 35%, but plans vary.
4. Co-pay: If coinsurance is a brutal gut punch, then the co-pay is an ice cream sundae and a tummy rub. If you want to just pay a flat fee of $10, $20, or such and such every time you see a provider, then look for a co-pay plan. Insurance companies offer them, so far as I can tell, because they don’t disincentivize office visits the way big fat $200 bills do, meaning their customers stay healthier and catch problems sooner. In addition to being healthier because you don’t feel guilty every time you want to go see a doc, there are no surprises because you pay your way up front. Co-pays can be a boon for people who have regular appointments with therapists or counselors, especially since all new plans must treat mental and behavioral health the same as primary care doctors. Thanks, Obama.
5. Prescription Benefits: These are for old people! Who cares?! Just kidding. Well, sort of. If you’re already on a regular prescription, you know what to look for: is it generic, is it name brand? Unless it’s incredibly cheap, you might aim to get a co-pay here as well. On the other hand, if you aren’t filling something regularly, it’s probably pointless to concentrate too hard on this aspect of your benefits. There isn’t enough time in the world to figure out which brands are preferred by your insurer, and how much they’ll cost you if you’ll ever need them. My advice is to get your prescription, check out how much it costs at the pharmacy, and decide then if you will be changing plans in the next year. Remember: the ACA also made pre-existing conditions a thing of the past when it comes to your insurance eligibility, so you can always switch if your medicine becomes too expensive. But in the meantime, don’t pay (in the form of higher premiums) for something you rarely use.
6. Out-Of-Pocket Maximum: This one’s for all the marbles. The Big Kahuna. The OOPM (no one calls it this, and you shouldn’t either) functions a lot like the deductible, in that your premium doesn’t count towards it, most of the other stuff does, and after you hit it, something happens. Except, instead of paying some small percentage of the tab like the least popular friend at Bennigan’s, after you hit the out-of-pocket Maximum, you’re done for the year. You can get as sick as you want, with no financial repercussions! Damn, nice. Most of the time, these numbers are big for reasons related to the insurance companies wanting your money to become their money, but it makes a lot more sense to use them instead of deductibles when you’re calculating your “worst case scenarios” and whether you’d be able to pay any other bills in the case of emergency. Hopefully, you never think about your maximums, but if you ever do, you’ll be glad they’re low. They also cost less to “buy” down than deductibles, so they’re a good value, too.

Ok, here’s a quick test to see if you get the concepts:
Q: There’s been an accident. You mistakenly bought the black Twizzlers instead of the red ones, and you seared your tongue in the panini press when you realized your error. Your deductible is $3,000, and you’ve spent $2,900 in qualified costs so far this year. Your coinsurance is 0%. Which guy is Goose, again? Ah, nevermind. I mean, what’s your OOPM?
A: $3,000. Your deductible and out-of-pocket max are same, since after you meet your deductible, you pay 0% of any other charges covered by your plan. Since that’s exactly what an OOPM is, the numbers are the same. (The $2900 was a red herring.) These types of plans do exist, by the way. But it’s not what I have.
What Insurance DO You Have?
I won’t just explain it to you, I’ll even link you to it! Bam.

It may not be the “Cadillac” of insurance plans, but it works for my family. It’s new this year because the insurer, Community Health Alliance, was new to my exchange this year. We have a $10 co-pay, which makes us a lot less resistant to visiting the doctor if someone has a sniffle, but should we ever forget what it’s like to step on a Lego at 5 a.m. and decide to have another child, we could actually afford to leave the hospital without nurses waiving invoices at us.
Last year, I had a plan from BlueCross BlueShield that was more than triple the co-pay and deductible of my current plan. It cost me $505.06/mo throughout 2014. Near the end of my term, BCBS let me know they would be raising my premium by about $200 for no reason. “Sorry,” they said. “Our profits did not jump quite as massively as we had could have hoped in our wildest dreams.” So I decided to move on. My current plan runs me $379.10. Competition is a good thing.
It’s not perfect; my wait time on the phone is longer now, and some of the places I used to go for healthcare are no longer in network. But the months of research, I think, were worth it. Hopefully you won’t need that much time, because the deadline for open enrollment is February 15th. If you move, or lose your job, you may be eligible for enrollment after that date, but don’t tempt fate. Moving sucks.
Jesse Farrar is a very serious and big time writer living in the media and journalism capital of the world, Nashville. Watch him almost joke his way out of a wet paper bag on Twitter at @BronzeHammer.

See: S. 786 THE FAMILY AND MEDICAL INSURANCE LEAVE (FAMILY) ACT from Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand [D, NY] https://www.popvox.com/bills/us/114/s786 and H.R. 932 THE HEALTHY FAMILIES ACT from REp. Rosa DeLauro [D-CT] https://www.popvox.com/bills/us/114/hr932

Mental Health Care Providers Still Refuse To Accept Private Insurance, And Kids Are Hit The Hardest
By Sy Mukherjee

In the months since the tragic shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Connecticut, what used to be a relatively hush-hush topic in American health care policy has become an open secret: the U.S. mental health care system is littered with serious coverage gaps. The stigma associated with receiving such care, a lack of readily-available access, and high out-of-pocket costs all contribute to the fact that millions of Americans aren’t getting the mental health treatment they need.
Newtown forced mental health care into the national spotlight, and both states and the federal government have proposed reform proposals — some of which are worse than others — to increase funding for mental health programs and strengthen community resources for treating mental illnesses at an early stage. For instance, Obamacare requires private insurance plans on its statewide marketplaces to cover mental services as part of its “essential health benefits,” and early results indicate that a 2008 law mandating that large insurers treat mental health benefits in the same manner as more traditional care may be working.
But as Politico reports, the biggest challenge facing Americans seeking mental health care therapy is the exorbitant out-of-pocket costs associated with such care, since many psychiatric practices still refuse to accept private insurance coverage:
Andrew Sperling, a lobbyist for the National Alliance on Mental Illness, said, “There are a lot of private practice psychiatrists who refuse to accept the lower rates offered by a plan, particularly for outpatient services, so that can create an access problem.”
A 2008 survey by the American Psychological Association found that 85 percent of licensed psychologists reported receiving some third-party payments. But a majority of those claims were paid by federal, state and local government programs.
That means that many Americans struggling with mental illnesses must pay out of their own pocket for talk therapy — which can run a couple of hundred dollars for a session — and other treatments. […]
Those findings are even more worrisome considering the disproportionate effect that a lack of mental health care has on children enrolled in private health plans, where “there’s a tremendous dearth of practitioners… and of the few who are there, many, many of them don’t take insurance plans,” according to Debbie Plotnick, senior director of state policy for the advocacy group Mental Health America.
Surprisingly, government programs such as Medicaid offer fairly strong benefits for mental health patients, as Politico’s report shows. But the limited number of providers who accept private insurance for therapeutic care — and the high per-visit out-of-pocket costs such providers charge — lend some context to the 2011 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) finding that over half of Americans simply cannot afford the cost of mental health care. Unlike more traditional medical problems, mental health care treatment often requires ongoing therapy and outpatient treatments for which Americans are charged for every visit, making them less likely to purse essential care — and for children, the problem is even worse, seeing as 70 percent of children in need of mental care do not receive it.
Congress has recently introduced two separate bills to bring more integration between physical and mental care, as well as to provide schools and communities resources for early identification and treatment of mental health issues in America’s youth. But until steps are taken to encourage outpatient mental health providers to accept private insurance, Americans — and particularly American children — may still be unable to afford the coverage they need.

Federal Employees Can Purchase Health Insurance For Their Pets, But Not Their Same-Sex Partners
By Igor Volsky
This morning, federal employees who are insured through the Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) Program received an email from Aetna advertising their new pet insurance plans. “In these challenging economic times, it’s good to know you can get some financial protection for unexpected illness and injury to your pets,” the e-mail reads before listing the many benefits:

The insurance is a handsome perk for those who can afford it, but what’s illuminating about the ad is that while federal employees can buy pet insurance “in these challenging economic times,” LGBT workers are still prohibited from purchasing policies for their partners or spouses by the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) — a federal law which denies federal benefits to legally married same sex couples.
President Obama supports repealing DOMA (although the administration is currently defending the policy in court), but hasn’t pressured Congress to repeal the Act. Last year, he issued a memorandum instructing federal agencies to “conduct a thorough review of the benefits they provide and to identify any that could be extended to LGBT employees and their partners and families” within the scope of current law and has since ordered federal agencies to “extend a host of benefits to their employees’ same-sex domestic partners.” These benefits include: long-term health insurance, credit union membership; access to fitness facilities, planning and counseling services (including briefings on employee pay and allowances, career counseling and retirement counseling.
There are currently two separate bills in the House and Senate to provide full federal benefits to same sex domestic partners of federal employee. Last year, the legislation was voted out of the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee on a bipartisan basis (Sen. Susan Collins (R-ME) co-sponsored the measure), but Sen. Joe Lieberman (D-CT) — the bill’s chief sponsor — has promised not to move this on the floor of the Senate “until we get the explicit offsets” from OPM. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimates that the legislation would cost approximately $310 million through 2020 and benefit some 30,000 employees with same-sex partners.
The House Oversight and Government Reform Committee approved a similar domestic partner benefits bill in November of 2009.
Update:
OPM sends in this clarification statement:
While Aetna is a participating carrier in the Federal Employee Health Benefits Program (FEHBP), the pet insurance product offered by Aetna is not a federal benefit, nor has it been listed as a benefit in any OPM prepared or reviewed materials. Aetna, on its own initiative, offers a variety of discount products to its members, including gym memberships, weight loss programs, eyewear, vitamins, etc. Pet insurance is one of these products.
 
Aetna has apologized for using the reference to FEHBP in its communication on this discount program.

Lump Sum Unemployment Insurance
By Matthew Yglesias
I’m not quite sure what Mitt Romney had in mind last night when he suggested replacing Unemployment Insurance with “personal accounts,” but it put me in mind of the system they use in Austria as described by David Card, Raj Chetty, and Andrea Weber in “Cash-on-Hand and Competing Models of Intertemporal Behavior: New Evidence from the Labor Market.”
The basic conservative take on Unemployment Insurance is that it increases unemployment by, in effect, paying people to not take jobs. Progressives counter that Unemployment Insurance is a high-multiplier form of Keynesian stimulus since unemployed people have a high propensity to spend their checks. What’s more, there are obviously humanitarian reasons you might want to hand out UI. One way of squaring the circle would be to make UI a bit more insurance-like and say that there’s a lump sum payment you get associated with job loss. Then you can do whatever you want with the money. Get a new job next week, and you have a windfall. Stretch it out and keep looking for three months. Whatever. This ought to have the claimed benefits for UI without the claimed harms. In Austria, they have a system like this. Except it only applies to workers who’ve amassed at least three years of experience at their previous employer. That discontinuity allows for a helpful empirical study of the impact of lump sums on worker behavior as follows:

Whoops! You actually get the reverse of the result predicted by the conservative theory. Even though the lump sum payments have no employment-disincentive effect, recipients of lump sum payments take longer to find jobs. It seems that the real issue here isn’t the incentives at all, but the impact on liquidity (full argument here). It seems to me that switching to a lump sum system might be a good for separate reasons. But the evidence from existing lump sum systems seems to mostly be that UI doesn’t have the incentive effect that Romney seemed to be worried about.

5 Ways to Update Car Insurance for the Connected World
When I first moved to the U.S. six years ago as a grad student, I bought a 1998 Honda Accord. It had seen better days, but it was a great car. Unfortunately, I had a rude awakening when I tried to buy a car insurance policy: it would cost me an entire month’s salary to insure it for the year.
This made no sense. I had a decade of driving experience and a clean record. Shouldn’t my premium reflect that? I knew I was a good driver, but as a new driver to the U.S. I had no data to prove it.
Right around this time my co-founder Jerry and I were in grad school studying transportation and driving behavior. It was where we had the fundamental insight that inspired Automatic: cars are just big computers on wheels. If I could somehow access the data about my safe driving habits and show it to my insurance company, I bet I could get a premium that fit my actual risk profile.
It was where we had the fundamental insight that inspired Automatic: cars are just big computers on wheels.
At Automatic, we aren’t just unlocking the power of the data hidden in cars. We’re rethinking how cars can fit into our lives, including how we insure them. Today’s insurance policies need to change to take advantage of the connected car technology that’s coming. Here’s what we believe insurance for the connected world should look like:
1. Connected car insurance should be fair
Insurance companies evaluate a lot of risk factors in calculating your premium: how long you’ve had your license, your accident history, the kind of car you drive, and whether you live in a high or low crime neighborhood. But they don’t know how much you drive or how safe your driving habits are. They don’t know this because they’ve never had the technology to get that data — at least, until now.
Drivers also should get the discounts they deserve. There’s no reason a responsible driver should be forced to subsidize someone else’s bad behavior. As a lower risk to the insurance company, a safe driver should pay less for insurance than a risky one. It’s only fair.
2. Connected car insurance should be transparent
Transparency is the key to making sure drivers never feel spied on. This principle is why our teen driver program License+ isn’t a typical parent-spies-on-kid product, but one where both parent and teen are active participants. The same goes for insurance. Drivers should know exactly what information they’re sharing with their insurance company and what it’s being used for so they can make the conscious decision to opt in or out.
3. Connected car insurance should be private and secure
Driving data is sensitive information and should never fall into unauthorized hands. The transfer of this data should be secure and encrypted end-to-end. This is one of the many reasons we build our own hardware. We also don’t share or sell our users’ private information, which you can learn more about in our Privacy Principles.
4. Connected car insurance should be affordable and accessible
Drivers shouldn’t have to purchase a brand new phone or car. It shouldn’t cost drivers extra to demonstrate their safe driving habits — insurance companies should provide an easily affordable way for drivers to do this.
5. Connected car insurance should be like the apps we use today: modern and beautiful
We all use technology products from Apple, Google, Facebook, and Twitter that delight us and make our lives better every day. The auto insurance experience should meet those same standards.
Insurance is at a turning point, with so much room for innovation and improvement. These five principles should guide anyone working in this industry. We have our own plans, of course, and can’t wait to show you what’s around the corner.

Fun Fact: Renters Insurance Doubles As Stolen Laptop Insurance

Did you know that if your apartment burns down/gets ransacked/blows up, your landlord’s insurance only covers his building, and not any of your stuff?! So that’s why you need renters insurance. That and, in case someone dies at your house. Renters insurance covers that, too!
It happened to me: A few years ago, someone shattered my car window and stole my laptop out from under the pile of jackets that was hiding it so well. When I called my car insurance company to make a claim, I learned the very important fact that car insurance only covers your car, not anything in your car (duh?). However: homeowners or renters insurance would have covered anything in my car, even if the car wasn’t in front of my house, which it wasn’t. I didn’t have homeowners or renters insurance at the time, because no one had told me I needed it (doh). But I got it, and I have it, and of course no one has bothered to steal anything of mine since, thanks.
How to buy: I have a car, so I just added it onto my car insurance policy for something silly like $8 a month, but if you don’t have a car you can totally just call up a company and say: “Yo. This is my address. How much is renters insurance?” It’ll be between $10 and $30 a month, depending on your apartment and your city and how much nice stuff you have and other factors. They’ll ask you some questions. You may or may not know the answers to them. In my experience, you can figure this stuff out on the fly, and it’s all relatively painless, and in a short amount of time, you have insurance.
These are some companies that offer renters insurance: I found them via Google — maybe you can find a few more, if you’re inclined. And don’t leave your laptop in your car. Amateur move.
Allstate
Geico
esurance
Progressive
Travelers
Photo Credit: Flickr/pmarkham

When Smartphone Insurance Isn’t Worth It
by Colleen Kane

Despite dropping my iPhones all the damn time since 2010, I never cracked a screen until this week. I attribute the streak of unbroken screens to slider cases by Incase, which I’ve used since scoring a free one at SXSW from bins near the outdoor stage where GWAR played. Soon after, I dropped my first iPhone two stories from my fire escape, but lo! The dirt-infused Downtown Brooklyn air parted as I climbed down to retrieve the phone, and although the white plastic case was cracked, the device was fine. I became a brand advocate.
So, what caused me to stray from this loyalty? A free golden Jennifer Lopez-branded case came with my new 5s gold iPhone in July at Viva Movil, a J. Lo-endorsed Verizon store. But as we now see, freedom isn’t free. I knew the case probably wasn’t very good at protecting the phone (you know, its actual purpose), but I was already feeling vulnerable after shelling out for the phone, and hey! Free shiny thing.
Besides, I had opted for the insurance, provided by Asurion, which also supplies insurance to the other major carriers. The Verizon Wireless website makes this case for it:
Why is protection important?
Getting equipment coverage or an extended warranty for your device means that you can be protected from damage, loss, malfunctions and defects. The cost of replacing your device without protection may be as high as full retail price.
Despite being a frugal person who seeks out items that are built to last, and reads pages of reviews of products to make sure I don’t buy something shoddy, in this particular case my frugality didn’t translate to reading the fine print.

My Precious in its J.Lo case. We had four glitzy months together, but nothing gold can stay.
What I took away from my in-store briefing about the insurance was that for $10 a month, I can get my phone replaced if the screen cracks or it suffers water damage or otherwise needs replacement. Sounds good.
However, what was not apparent until I initiated my claim online was the $199 deductible you have to pay for this “free” replacement phone, without guarantee of getting the same or an unused phone. It’s also super wasteful to get a whole new phone just because the screen is broken. You can even replace the screen yourself, but despite the eternal bragging rights, I do not wish to mess with the guts of my pocket computer.
Instead, I paid $100 to get my screen replaced at SmartAddiction in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn (with a 30-day warranty and a free anti-glare screen protector), whereas the Apple Store charges $149. While it was getting repaired, I went Christmas shopping up the street at Century 21 and purchased a designer-label gift that originally went for $95 for $27. See? I’m practically getting paid to not use my insurance.
I also canceled the Asurion plan. That extra $120 a year plus the $199 deductible makes no sense unless you break the screen three times a year or you need to completely replace the phone.
But to my mind, the most pressing threat to an iPhone, the one that you see happening regularly, is a cracked screen. Here I go tempting fate by saying: I’m not likely to lose mine since when I’m out if I’m not holding it, I’m always reaching into my purse for my phone to make sure it’s there. But if your phone is lost, stolen, or otherwise needs replacement, I don’t agree with the Verizon website’s claim that you may have to pay up to the full cost of a phone to replace it. You don’t have to do anything. There are options. Unlocked phones are sold on eBay, or you can get one from a friend who upgraded. Or maybe even consider something affordable that’s not an iPhone. There’s also rumors of cheaper insurance that costs half of what Asurion charges and often doesn’t have a deductible.
In conclusion, even if you are one of those slapstick klutzes in an informercial for whom everything is impossibly hard and who falls down the stairs on the regular, do not waste your money on this nonsense. A good quality phone case (make sure the edges overlap the screen, as my repair guy pointed out) is a better investment than the insurance. I have to go read dozens of user reviews now, but the iPhone 5 version of my iPhone 3-saving Incase, their slider case, is priced on Amazon as low as one cent.
Colleen Kane is so committed to getting more for her money that she just moved from Brooklyn to Staten Island. You can find her on Twitter @colleenkane, but she’s more into ‘gramming @colleenkane.
Photo: Thorsten Hartmann


Insurance Technology
Insurance is predestined to be one of the most quantitative and data-driven yet personalized and customer-centric industries — risks can be defined, measured and priced according to the customer’s characteristics. The insurance sector should be at the forefront of service innovation. However, in reality, we see legacy backend systems from the 80s and pushy sales agents. The industry is ripe for agile and customer-centric business models to enter the market to enhance insurance for everyone. We have already seen the first wave of InsurTech startups successfully improving B2C insurance sales and management — now is the time to take InsurTech to the next level.
B2B SaaS
Insurance companies are striving for new ways to enhance their policies and processes. In everything from fraud detection to underwriting, claims handling and sales support, we see the potential for intelligent SaaS algorithms to give insurance companies an edge in keeping up with the pace of digitalization. SaaS solutions will help them to streamline their operations and reduce their administrative hassle.
Telematics
Risks are priced based on a customer group that the specific customer happens to fall into — not on the specific customer himself. Too often, the first assessment is proven wrong and it is especially costly and frustrating when large risks are involved. Telematics will lead the way to personalized insurance contracts, where risks are written based on the actual behaviour of the customer. Pay-as-you-live models might have gotten off to a bad start in Germany, as privacy regulations are an important issue to be solved — yet the overall potential of personalized insurance is undeniable. Nevertheless, customer-centricity has to be at the heart of each startup tackling the market.
New insurance companies
The king of them all. A new carrier free from legacy policies and systems can truly create a new kind of insurance. The insurance gold which is yet to be mined is customer data — by truly understanding the customer, finding out his or her specific characteristics and degree of risk aversion, modern policies can be written that exactly suit the customer’s needs. The rise of modern, digital-at-heart direct insurance policies is to be expected, as this is the most holistic model to reinvent better insurance for everyone.
Take a look at our current portfolio of various industries.

People Who Are Alive Today Because Of Obamacare Beg Court Not To Take Their Health Insurance Away
CREDIT: AP PHOTO/J. SCOTT APPLEWHITE, FILE
Disclosure: The author of this post consulted on the drafting of this brief.
David Tedrow believes that Obamacare saved his life. Near the end of 2013, he was suffering from end-stage liver failure and needed a transplant or he would die. Unable to afford the transplant or the expensive follow-up care without insurance, David was able to obtain the health plan he needed to pay for his treatment through the Affordable Care Act’s insurance exchange in North Carolina, and this allowed him to remain on a transplant list he would have been taken off of if he was uninsured.
Last April, David received the transplant that saved his life. He believes that he is still here today because of Obamacare.
David is one of several individuals with life-threatening health conditions that joined an amicus brief filed Monday in the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. The brief asks the court to reject a claim brought by opponents of the Affordable Care Act seeking to cut off health subsidies to people entitled to receive them in nearly three dozen states. Other signatories to this brief include Jared Blitz, a man born with a heart condition who is able to afford life-saving heart surgery because of the Affordable Care Act, Jennifer Causor, a woman with cystic fibrosis whose story ThinkProgress told here, and Steve Orofino, a chemist and cancer patient who says that “I would have had to declare bankruptcy or I could be dead by now if it weren’t for the Act.”
The theory behind the lawsuit, known as Halbig v. Burwell, is that a passage of the Affordable Care Act should be read out of context in order to strip health insurance from millions of Americans. The Act gives each state a choice. They can either operate their own health exchange, where the state’s residents may buy subsidies health insurance, or they may allow the federal government to operate this exchange for them. The plaintiffs latch onto a provision of the law that appears to restrict subsidies to individuals who obtain insurance through “an Exchange established by the State,” though, as we explain in detail here and here, the bulk of the law contradicts the Halbig plaintiffs’ reading. Moreover, Supreme Court precedent instructs courts not to read individual passages of a law out of context. “[A] reviewing court should not confine itself to examining a particular statutory provision in isolation,” the Court explained in 2007, as the “meaning — or ambiguity — of certain words or phrases may only become evident when placed in context.”
Much of the threat Halbig presents to people like David, Jared, Jennifer and Steve is obvious. If the courts agree to cut off subsidies in most of the states, the out-of-pocket cost of health insurance premiums will skyrocket for many individuals because their premium will no longer be paid in part through Obamacare. As the amicus brief points out, however, Halbig is actually considerably more dangerous than an initial look at it might suggest.
The reason why is because health insurers must maintain a delicate balance of sick and healthy customers in order to remain in business. The nature of health insurance is that some customers — those that are currently healthy — pay more into their health plan’s insurance pool than they are currently drawing out. Meanwhile, other customers — those that are sick or have expensive chronic conditions — receive more money out of the insurance pool than they pay into it through their premiums. Thus, an insurance company must have enough healthy customers to pay for their sick customers, or they will be unable to cover the costs of these sick customers’ care.
If the subsidies dry up, people like David or Jennifer will continue to pay for insurance at nearly any price — they have no other choice. But if the cost of insurance rises, many healthy people will decide that they would rather take their chances without insurance than pay expensive premiums. As more and more healthy people drop out of the insurance pool, however, the insurer will have no choice but to raise premiums in order to cover the costs of the sick customers that remain in the pool. Yet, as premiums rise even further, even more healthy people drop out of the pool. The result is a “death spiral” where higher premiums beget fewer customers, which beget higher premiums, which beget fewer customers.
Another amicus brief filed on behalf of several dozen economists predicted that, if the subsidies are cut off, the resulting premium spikes will render insurance “unaffordable for more than 99 percent of the families and individuals eligible for subsidies” in the states with federally-run exchanges. That could be enough to collapse the individual health insurance markets in those states, cutting off insurance entirely to people like David.
As David’s brief points out, even the Affordable Care Act’s opponents understood that this was not how Obamacare was supposed to work before Halbig was on the horizon. Justices Scalia, Kennedy, Thomas and Alito authored a dissenting opinion in 2012 calling for the entire Affordable Care Act to be repealed. Yet they also explained in their dissent that, if there are no subsidies for insurance purchasers, the health exchanges “would not operate as Congress intended and may not operate at all.” Indeed, if there were no subsidies “insurance companies w[ould] have little incentive to sell insurance on the exchanges,” as insurance sold on the exchanges is subject to additional regulation.
Indeed, the Halbig plaintiffs’ legal theory was rejected by dozens of Republican elected officials who called upon the Supreme Court to repeal the law. Thirty-six senators — all Republicans — signed an amicus brief in 2012 explaining that Obamacare is “dependent on each of its interlocking provisions,” including the insurance subsidies. Twenty-four state governors or attorneys general signed a brief in the same litigation explaining that the Affordable Care Act’s “core provisions are carefully constructed to work in unison to achieve Congress’ paramount goal of ‘near-universal’ insurance coverage.” Now, however, the law’s opponents want the courts to believe that one of Obamacare’s “core provisions” can simply be deactivated in most states, and that the law is not “dependent on each of its interlocking provisions” after all.
Should the courts accept this invitation, the losers will be David, Jared, Jennifer, Steve and millions of other Americans who depend upon the Affordable Care Act for medical care. As the brief explains, the court’s “decision will not only affect how they and millions of similarly situated Americans with preexisting conditions live their lives, in many cases th[e] Court’s decision will decide whether they live at all.”

REPORT: Deregulation of Insurance Industry Would Create Wild West Environment
By Igor Volsky
Conservative health care plans push Americans to buy health insurance in the individual market, outside of the employer-based system. Citing the rising costs of health care, conservatives argue that consumers can find cheaper plans and exercise greater control over their health care decisions if they go out and buy their own insurance.
But their rhetoric of “freedom” and “choice” obscures the dangers and shortcomings of the individual insurance market. “While employers are guaranteed the right to purchase health insurance,” the great majority of states — which govern the individual insurance market place — do not extend the same protections to Americans who buy individual insurance policies.
In fact, according to pre-released copy of a study by Families USA, acquired by the Wonk Room, in most states “insurers can refuse to sell individuals policies based on their health, recreational activities, occupations, credit histories, and a variety of other factors” — and state governments do little to stop them:
[States] are doing very little to provide basic protections for health care consumers. As a result, many consumers are turned down from coverage or are charged unaffordable premiums or have their health claims wrongfully denied.
Indeed, the study found that “only five states prohibit all insurance companies from cherry-picking the healthiest consumers and excluding everyone else” and gave the majority of states a “failing grade in consumer insurance protection”:
- 35 states: have “no limits on how much insurers can increase premiums based on an individual’s health status.”
- 21 states: “exclude coverage for pre-existing conditions for more than one year.”
- 44 states: allow insurers to “revoke an individual’s health insurance policy without advance review by the state.”
- 20 states: do not approve premium rates before they go into effect.
- 29 states: do not require insurers to complete all medical underwriting and resolve all questions at the time of application.
As Families USA points out, “the last thing the health care system needs is a new wild west mentality…with little or no protection or oversight”:
Without adequate protections, insurers can deny coverage, charge exorbitant premiums, and even revoke people’s policies without warning.
Conservative reform initiatives would provide consumers with even less protections. By deregulating the insurance industry and allowing individuals to purchase insurance policies across state lines, without requiring insurance companies to comply with the consumer protection laws of the state, companies would offer cheaper plans to healthier Americans, while charging higher premiums — or not offering any coverage — to the sickest Americans.

Enabling Affordable Health Insurance for Dashers with Stride Health
Tens of thousands of Dashers across the US use the DoorDash platform to keep a flexible schedule, make extra cash, and fund their personal goals. And we work hard to make sure Dashers have the resources they need to thrive on DoorDash every single day. While Dashers love the flexibility of these types of platforms, one reason many people choose to stick with a full time job is because of the health insurance offered by their companies. Historically, health insurance has been tied to a job, meaning that people often ended up staying longer in roles where they were unhappy simply because they felt unable to leave. However, the Affordable Care Act and similar programs are now making it easier than ever for people to start their own businesses, pursue their passions, or work part time, by offering health insurance that is independent of people’s day to day jobs.
Today, we’re collaborating with Stride Health to make it easier than ever for Dashers to take advantage of the Affordable Care Act and get access to affordable health insurance. Stride will not only help Dashers access government exchange plans, but they will also provide additional helpful features like year-round support from their health advisors and exclusive pharmacy deals. In addition, Stride guides Dashers through every step of the health insurance process, from applying for subsidies to waiting on the phone with the insurance company.

Stride is particularly great for finding discounts and other monthly subsidies that most people might miss, often making health insurance less expensive than a phone bill. They are also quick to help you find the right plan with a doctor you know and trust, often in just 10 minutes. Finally, by providing different ways to model your health expenses and any possible emergency scenarios that may come up, they can help save you even more money.
Collaborating with Stride Health is just one of the many efforts we have in the works over the next year to help Dashers get the most out of their experience on DoorDash. To get started today, check out the personalized DoorDash + Stride Health page at doordash.stridehealth.com.
Don’t forget that Open Enrollment runs from November 1 to January 31. So whether you use Stride, the Affordable Care Act’s healthcare.gov website, or get insurance through a family member, be sure to sign up before the end of January. We’re excited to be present this service to Dashers on the platform and we can’t wait to see you on the road!


Health Insurance Industry Defends Massive Profits, Complains It Is Being ‘Vilified’
By Igor Volsky

Insurers have responded to the administration’s campaign against recent rate hikes by blaming increasing health care costs, provider cost increases and adverse selection (healthier Americans are dropping coverage) for their premium increases. To hear them tell it, the insurance industry is a low-profit industry that spends just one cent of every premium dollar on administration and strives to reduce costs by encouraging efficiencies. Insurers “do not deserve to be vilified for political purposes,” Robert Zirkelbach, a spokesman for America’s Health Insurance Plans (AHIP) told the AP:
For every dollar spent on health care in America, less than one penny goes toward health plan profits. The focus needs to be on the other 99 cents.
But the argument that insurers run a tight ship is misleading, on several counts, not least of which is the fact that insurers are planning to spend “more than $1 million” not on health care claims — as their justification for the premium hikes would suggest — but “to run television ads on cable stations nationwide beginning in the next few days to push back on the attacks on insurers.”
That $1 million ad fund will presumably come from the one penny that goes towards health care profits. But this too is misleading. Zirkelbach is clever enough to compare the private insurance industry’s administrative spending to national health care expenditures — 45 percent of which includes spending in Medicare, Medicaid and other public programs. In the context of total spending, insurers administrative costs may look small, but compared to the revenues of private insurers, administrative spending is seen as far more substantial. Insurers skim off 15–20 percent of premium dollars for administrative costs and profits which fund TV ad campaigns, Washington lobbyists, lavish company retreats and outlandish CEO salaries.
The top five earning insurance companies averaged profits of $12.2 billion, an increase of $4.4 billion, or 56 percent, from 2008. And in 2008 (the last year for which data was available), CEO compensation for these companies ranged from $3 million to $24 million.” Below is a partial list of insurer/CEO profits:
Insurer:Company Profits 2009:CEO Total Compensation 2008 Or Earlier:CEO 5 Year Compensation:UnitedHealth Group$3.8 billion$5 million — WellPoint$4.75 billion$4 million — Atena$1.28 billion$38 million$77 millionHumana$1 billion$2 million$56 millionCigna$1.3 billion$10 million$121 million
Insurer profits increased even in the midst of the current recession. Last week, during a hearing before the House Energy and Commerce Health Subcommittee, WellPoint admitted that it increased premiums to keep up with medical costs and maintain a 2% profit. The company’s 2009 fourth quarter net income “was more than $2.7 billion, a 727 percent increase from the fourth quarter of last year” — even as membership declined by some 4 percent.
Insurer profits are of course just one culprit for increasing premiums, but considering that insurers have been able to increase their returns by purging sicker Americans from the rolls and pulling out of competitive markets, the President’s strong rhetoric is more than justified. The Senate bill will start forcing insurers to earn profit by figuring out ways to deliver quality care more efficiently and they’re not very interested in accepting these changes.

Insurance Companies Are Making Chronically Ill People Pay More For Necessary Drugs
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
By Sam P.K. Collins
Insurance companies have circumvented a provision of the Affordable Care Act that forbids them from turning away people with preexisting conditions by shifting exorbitant drug costs to members of that population, ultimately discouraging them from enrolling in certain plans, a new study has confirmed.
For this study, Harvard University researchers examined 48 plans in 12 states using the federal marketplace — including Delaware, Florida, Louisiana, Michigan, South Carolina, and Illinois. They found that one out of four plans placed HIV drugs in the highest-cost category, requiring consumers to shoulder at least 30 percent of the costs instead of paying a standard co-pay.
The analysis also found that people enrolled in these drug plans paid more than triple the amount their counterparts in other plans doled out. According to the study, patients had to pay a separate deductible for medication, compared to less than 20 percent of consumers in other plans.
While the Harvard study, recently published in the New England Journal of Medicine, only examined HIV medication, authors noted that similar issues arise when it comes to mental illness, cancer, diabetes, and other chronic conditions.
“That’s really a large cost difference, and really is a very significant financial constraint for those with chronic conditions, particularly H.I.V.,” Douglas B. Jacobs, the lead author of the study, who is pursuing degrees in public health at the Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health and medicine at the University of California, San Francisco, told the New York Times.
The average annual cost of HIV/AIDS medication, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, currently stands at more than $19,000. A consumer could expect to pay nearly $380,000 over the course of his or her lifetime to keep the disease in check. Although the Affordable Care Act bans insurers from charging more than $6,350 in annual out-of-pocket costs for individuals and more than $12,700 for families, people with chronic diseases often reach this threshold within a month because of their medication’s special classification.
While insurers have long tried to mitigate costs and encourage use of generic drugs by placing HIV medication in categories with higher co-pays, the price of what was once affordable medication has increased by more than 1000 percent in a relatively short amount of time, pushing it into higher cost categories to the detriment of people suffering from chronic diseases.
Consumers and advocacy groups said they have had enough. Last summer, patient advocate groups filed formal complaints with Health and Human Services officials in Florida and Georgia, alleging that insurance companies tried to price consumers out of their plans and create barriers to access for medication they have taken for years. Some advocates have made headway in Florida, with Insurance Commissioner Kevin M. McCarthy reaching an agreement with four insurers to lower cost-sharing for special medications — which previously stood at 50 percent — to a more manageable 10 percent.
Advocate groups, however, have showed no sign of slowing down. In July, more than 300 organizations signed a letter imploring U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell to strengthen enforcement of anti-discrimination laws that protect people with preexisting chronic conditions.
“Despite enrollee out-of-pocket limits that are included in the ACA and reduced cost-sharing for people with very low income levels, some plans are placing extremely high co- insurance on lifesaving medications, and putting all or most medications in a given class, including generics, on the highest cost tier. This creates an undue burden on enrollees who rely on these medications,” the letter said.
The coalition of advocacy groups concluded that “these practices are highly discriminatory against patients with chronic health conditions and may, in fact, violate the ACA non-discrimination provisions.”
In December, the Obama administration announced that it would investigate allegations of insurers’ discrimination against people with chronic diseases, designating these kind of practices as discriminatory if they restrict access to drugs meant to treat or quell chronic conditions. The White House later issued rules that require insures to be more diligent in updating publications that list its doctors and hospitals. The White House, however, stopped short in obligating them to expand said networks.
These overtures may not be enough in preventing drug prices from rising even more, especially since Big Pharma has proven to have great influence in public policy. An analysis by the Center for Responsive Politics found that the pharmaceutical industry spent more than $227 million as part of its lobbying strategy in 2014.
Big Pharma’s relationship with Washington is nothing new. A 10-year, $80 million cost-savings deal between pharmaceutical representatives and the White House during the design of the Affordable Care Act, for example, prevented the executive branch from making any further attempts to negotiate lower drug prices and import cheaper drugs from Canada or Europe
Senators who questioned the deal — including Sherrod Brown (D-Ohio) and Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) — decried Big Pharma’s influence at the expense of consumers. “The drug companies form the most powerful lobby in Washington,” Sanders told the LA Times in 2009. ”They never lose.”

Democrats Fight To Repeal Michigan’s New ‘Rape Insurance’ Law
CREDIT: AP PHOTO/SUSAN WALSH
A group of Michigan lawmakers have introduced a measure to roll back a controversial abortion restriction that went into effect this past spring. The new law requires women in the state to purchase a separate insurance policy for abortion coverage, even in cases of rape or incest.
The measure has been widely derided as “rape insurance,” since it essentially forces victims of sexual assault to pay out-of-pocket for an abortion procedure unless they thought ahead and purchased a separate insurance rider. During the legislative fight over the bill, State Senate Minority Leader Gretchen Whitmer (D) disclosed her own experience with sexual assault to explain why she was opposed to the proposed law. Now, Whitmer continues to fight back.
“This law hurts all women,” Whitmer said at a press conference this week to announce the repeal effort, which she is spearheading. “Not just women who are victims of incest or rape, or who experience the gut-wrenching effect of a miscarriage, but every single woman or man who has to make the decision about whether or not to pre-purchase abortion rider insurance for the women who are covered by their insurance, including their daughters.”
Whitmer also called the law “one of the most misogynistic laws I’ve ever seen.”
Dr. Timothy Johnson, who works at the University of Michigan’s Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, pointed out that the law is creating confusion among medical professionals. Some women experience serious complications that result in the loss of a wanted pregnancy, and it’s unclear whether those situations fall under the state law’s definition of an abortion. “This is creating a lot of uncertainty in the doctor-patient relationship. The last thing we want is to have to worry about who has to pay for a necessary procedure,” he said at the press conference.
The lawmakers who introduced the repeal effort acknowledged that it’s unlikely they’ll succeed in the Michigan legislature, which is dominated by abortion opponents. Indeed, now that they’ve successfully restricted women’s abortion coverage, conservative lawmakers continue to introduce other stringent anti-choice measures. Earlier this month, a group of 16 male politicians introduced a radical “heartbeat” measure that would criminalize nearly all abortions.
Still, Democrats are hoping to mobilize public opposition to the so-called “rape insurance” law. “Michigan has been an embarrassment in terms of how we treat private medical decisions between a woman and her doctor,” Libby McGaughey, vice president of public advocacy for Planned Parenthood Advocates of Michigan, said in a statement. “It’s good to finally see some reasonable legislation being introduced in Lansing.”
And Michigan Democrats aren’t alone. Pro-choice lawmakers in Virginia and Ohio have also recently introduced measures to roll back their states’ attacks on abortion rights.
Michigan’s new insurance restriction has captured a lot of media attention over the past several months, but it’s hardly the only state that’s enacted this particular policy. Cutting off access to insurance coverage for abortion is an very popular method of restricting reproductive rights, and complicated laws that segregate abortion from the rest of women’s reproductive health care are in place across the country. Obamacare’s state-level exchanges have introduced a new avenue for abortion opponents to further this artificial divide.

The Difficulties With People Of Color Using Their New Health Insurance
A sign points the way to Flint River Hospital, which closed its emergency room last year, in Montezuma, Ga. CREDIT: AP PHOTO/DAVID GOLDMAN
By Sam P.K. Collins
Since the implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), more than 16.5 million people — particularly low-income Americans and people of color — have enrolled in an insurance plan for the first time, giving proponents of the health care law reason to praise it as a tool in protecting marginalized populations. A new study, however, points out that will take much more than Obamacare itself to close the persistent racial and socioeconomic disparities in health care access.
Researchers affiliated with D.C.-based advocacy organization Alliance for a Just Society analyzed 1,200 low-income patients in 10 states, nine of which have an uninsured rate well above the national average of 17.3 percent. Four of the states examined accepted the optional expansion of Medicaid, a joint federal and state government program that extends public insurance coverage to low-income people, under the ACA.
The research team found that a host of issues impede people of color’s access to health care — including language barriers, lack of Internet, a dearth of primary care providers, and confusion about health care plans. A quarter of Latinos — a group for which a significant amount of Obamacare enrollment outreach has been targeted — said it has been more than a year since they’ve seen a physician. Forty-five percent of Native Americans also said they had a personal physician, compared to 85 percent of their white counterparts.
The study’s authors suggest that, even though the health care reform law is extending insurance coverage to some people of color who previously went uninsured, that’s not the only measure of success in this area. The people who are gaining insurance under Obamacare need more information to help them navigate the health insurance industry, as well as better access to providers.
“People look at enrollment but the bigger problem is access to care. The new enrollees haven’t had health care before so this notion of going to the doctor is not ingrained, and there’s no intermediary step that tells people to get up to speed and prevent or intervene the chronic diseases they might have,” Gary Delgado, principal investigator in this study, told ThinkProgress. “A significant percentage of African Americans and Latinos don’t have what’s called a medical home, so they continue to get service in the emergency room. They no longer pay enormous fees but that doesn’t count as ongoing health care.”
Technological barriers also play a role. “The question of Internet access still looms large for access to care because that’s the way that insurance companies want to communicate,” said Delgado, who is also a visiting scholar at the Institute for the Study of Social Change at the University of California, Berkeley.
Historically, people of color have been less likely to be insured and have died younger than their white counterparts. The direct and indirect costs of health disparities amount to more than $1.24 trillion over the course of three years in the form of years of healthy life lost, loss of productivity, and additional burden on American taxpayers, according to data collected by researchers at Johns Hopkins University, Bloomberg School of Public Health. These disparities partly stem from patients’ failure to detect their ailments early enough.
In theory, the Affordable Care Act should have given minority groups more opportunities to receive the preventative health care that can eventually reduce instances of chronic diseases that have historically afflicted those groups disproportionately. While community health centers have been found to be effective tools in closing those gaps on the ground, vast differences still persist between the primary care hubs located in minority neighborhoods and those that serve white patrons, especially in the months since the client base in minority neighborhoods have expanded. According to Delgado, waiting times for people of color are longer.
Hospitals also haven’t been able to keep up with the influx of new enrollees. The overcrowding and shuttering of community hospitals, particularly those in places where a significant number of African Americans and Latinos live, can increase patients’ likelihood of dying by five percent. Studies have cited patient waits of up to 24 hours for bed assignments and the divergence of ambulances away from emergency rooms at a rate of one vehicle per minute. The distance to the nearest emergency centers can have a concrete effect: Children living more than a mile from an emergency care facility, for example, utilize its services 11 percent less than children living in other areas.
In some centers, Spanish-speaking residents reportedly had more difficulty connecting with nurses and doctors. Experts attribute that dilemma to the paucity of Latinos working in the U.S. health care system and lack of cultural competency that would translate into better service. Subsets of the black population have faced similar issues. A 2012 study found that about two-thirds of primary care doctors harbor unconscious biases toward their African-American patients, leading those doctors to spend less time with their black patients and involve them less frequently in medical decisions.
The disparities don’t stop at the hospitals. Insurance companies have worked to circumvent a provision of the Affordable Care Act that forbids them from turning away people with preexisting conditions by shifting exorbitant drug costs — particularly those for HIV — to members of that population, ultimately discouraging them from enrolling in certain plans. A study conducted earlier this year found that one in four plans placed HIV medication in a category that would require consumers to shoulder at least 30 percent of the costs instead of paying a standard co-pay. The authors of that study noted that similar issues arise when it comes to mental illness, cancer, diabetes, and other conditions that disproportionately affect minority groups.
“Despite enrollee out-of-pocket limits that are included in the ACA and reduced cost-sharing for people with very low income levels, some plans are placing extremely high co- insurance on lifesaving medications, and putting all or most medications in a given class, including generics, on the highest cost tier. This creates an undue burden on enrollees who rely on these medications,” a January letter to U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell from 300 advocacy groups read.
In their report, the research team suggests a host of changes that include monitoring insurers’ quality improvement plans, strengthening community-based health care programs that have historically served minority communities, expanding and extending the role of navigators in showing new enrollees how to use their insurance coverage, and offering free translation and interpretation services to those who speak little English.
However, Delgado contends that even with changes in hospitals and community clinics, nothing would make as much a difference in closing racial and socioeconomic gaps in quality of health care as Medicaid expansion, a contentious policy that has lawmakers divided along party lines.
The GOP-controlled states that have refused to expand their Medicaid programs have created a coverage gap that leaves low-income people with any access to affordable insurance and that disproportionately affects black Americans. The Kaiser Family Foundation recently estimated that if every state accepted the expansion, more than 40 percent of uninsured people of color would gain coverage.

In Landmark Class Action, Farmers Insurance Sues Local Governments For Ignoring Climate Change
A section of a car can be seen in a gaping sinkhole that opened up a residential street on Chicago’s South Side after a cast iron water main dating back to 1915 broke during a massive rain storm Thursday, April 18, 2013, in Chicago. CREDIT: AP/ M. SPENCER GREEN
By Ari Phillips
Last month, Farmers Insurance Co. filed nine class-action lawsuits arguing that local governments in the Chicago area are aware that climate change is leading to heavier rainfall but are failing to prepare accordingly. The suits allege that the localities did not do enough to prepare sewers and stormwater drains in the area during a two-day downpour last April. In what could foreshadow a legal reckoning of who is liable for the costs of climate change, the class actions against nearly 200 Chicago-area communities look to place responsibility on municipalities, perhaps spurring them to take a more forward-looking approach in designing and engineering for a future made different by climate change.
“Farmers is asking to be reimbursed for the claims it paid to homeowners who sometimes saw geysers of sewage ruin basement walls, floors and furniture,” reported E&E; News. “The company says it also paid policyholders for lost income, the cost of evacuations and other damages related to declining property values.”
Andrew Logan, an insurance expert with Ceres, told E&E; News that there is likely a longer-term agenda in mind with this latest effort, and that the company “could be positioning itself to avoid future losses nationwide from claims linked to floods, sea-level rise and even lawsuits against its corporate policyholders that emit greenhouse gases.”
While these suits are the first of their kind, Micahel Gerrard, director of the Center for Climate Change Law at Columbia Law School in New York, told Reuters that there will be more cases like them attempting to address how city and local governments should manage budgets to prepare for natural disasters that have been intensified by climate change.
“No one is expected to plan for the 500-year storm, but if horrible events are happening with increasing frequency, that may shift the duties,” he said.
Insurance companies are becoming increasingly concerned, and more vocal, about the rising costs of climate change. With large fossil fuel companies reluctant to take greenhouse gas mitigation efforts in the face of potential profit losses, the behemoth insurance industry could provide a counterbalance to the energy industry when it comes to incentivizing near-term emissions cuts, or at least adaptation to the effects of climate change.
“Most insurers, including the reinsurance companies that bear much of the ultimate risk in the industry, have little time for the arguments heard in some right-wing circles that climate change isn’t happening, and are quite comfortable with the scientific consensus that burning fossil fuels is the main culprit of global warming,” reported the New York Times.
However this acceptance of the scientific consensus is yet to infiltrate the industry’s actions at large. A recent Ceres survey found that only 23 of the 184 insurance companies currently have a comprehensive strategy to deal with climate change.
“Every segment of the insurance industry faces climate risks, yet the industry’s response has been highly uneven,” said Ceres president Mindy Lubber, in a statement with the report. “The implications of this are profound because the insurance sector is a key driver of the economy. If climate change undermines the future availability of insurance products and risk management services in major markets throughout the U.S., it threatens the economy and taxpayers as well.”
Last year a study for the Federal Emergency Management Agency found that sea level rise is projected to increase coastal flood-hazard areas in the U.S. by 55 percent by 2100. If adaptation measures are not implemented, the study projects that the number of coastal flood-insurance policies will increase by 130 percent over the same time period. While flood insurance is overseen by the controversial National Flood Insurance Program, this is an example of the increased role of insurers in the face of climate change as well as the increased burden on insurance companies and taxpayers to cover the costs.
In another sign that the insurance industry may be ready to galvanize action, Lloyd’s of London, the world’s oldest and biggest insurance market, recently called on insurers to incorporate climate change into their models.
“Insurers have an important role to play in mitigating the impact of the changes in climate which have already occurred, through closer coordination with other industries, notably construction,” wrote John Nelson, chairman of Lloyd’s of London, in an op-ed for The Guardian. “There need to be policies to drive up standards and make sure we have resilient homes, that we use better materials. All these and strong forward planning will be key to this effort. Here, too, governments must play their role in enshrining standards in legislation.”
According to the Munich Re insurance group, global weather-related losses and damage have risen from an annual average of about $50 billion in the 1980s to close to $200 billion over the last decade.
While climate change models try to anticipate changes decades in advance, insurers are responsible for selling policies one year at a time. A report last year from the Geneva Association, an insurance industry research group, encourages companies to use forward-looking models when addressing areas impacted by climate change, rather than the more traditional historical precedent.
“In the non-stationary environment traditional approaches, which are solely based on analyzing historical data, increasingly fail to estimate today’s hazard probabilities. A paradigm shift from historic to predictive risk assessment methods is necessary,” reads the report.

A brief history of U.S. health insurance reform
President Obama signs Heritagecare into law. 2009. Image source.
1989 —Heritagecare is born
Conservatives propose principles of a free market alternative to a “single payer” system, including a health insurance mandate. This free market proposal is designed by the Heritage Foundation, the flagship conservative think tank that guided public policy under President Reagan (and has played a significant role in President Trump’s transition efforts). Stuart Butler, PhD, a Distinguished Fellow at the Heritage Foundation, authored Heritage’s proposal in 1989, including the following cornerstone policy:
“Mandate all households to obtain adequate insurance.”
1993 — Hillarycare loses
President Clinton tackles health insurance reform, putting Hillary Clinton in charge of reform efforts. Hillarycare has been described as “much to the left of Obamacare.” Conservative opposition to Hillarycare is fierce, with some conservative opponents offering Heritagecare as the conservative alternative. Hillarycare fails.
In 1993, in fighting “Hillarycare,” virtually every conservative saw the mandate as a less dangerous future than what Hillary was trying to do — Newt Gingrich
2000s —Heritagecare wins
Conservatives continue championing Heritagecare, complete with its insurance mandate. A Republican governor successfully passes and implements Heritagecare in a blue state, a victory proudly heralded by leading conservatives.
[K]ey parts of Romneycare were replicated by Obamacare, including some of the more controversial ones— CNBC
The core drivers of the [2009] health care act are market principles formulated by conservative economists, designed to correct structural flaws in our health insurance system — principles originally embraced by Republicans as a market alternative to the Clinton plan in the early 1990s. — J.D. Kleinke, Fellow at conservative think tank AEI
2009 — President Obama compromises
Newly-elected President Obama begins tackling health insurance reform. After tepidly supporting a single payer system during the campaign, he compromises/sells out (depending on your perspective) and proposes a hybrid plan: Heritagecare plus a “public option.”
Conservatives hate the idea of a public option. President Obama compromises (again) and abandons the public option. The final Affordable Care Act bill is essentially a nationwide implementation of Heritagecare. Conservatives hate that, too.
I would have thought — since this was an idea that had previously gotten a lot of Republican support — it would continue to get a lot of Republican support. And yet magically, the minute we said, “This is a great idea and it’s working,” the Republicans said, “This is terrible, and we don’t want to do this.” — President Obama
2015 — Heritagecare/Romneycare/Obamacare wins
Without Romneycare, I don’t think we would have Obamacare— Mitt Romney
Obamacare has done a lot of good, bit it hasn’t been perfect. Premiums have continued to rise, though studies show that they’re rising less quickly than they were previously.
According to the Kaiser/Health Research and Educational Trust studies, family premiums for employer-sponsored insurance increased by a cumulative 99 percent — basically doubling — under the eight years of Bush, while under eight years of Obama, they rose by a much more modest 59 percent (source).
Source
In addition, while rates of Americans who are uninsured has gone down, we haven’t yet achieved universal (100%) coverage:
Source: CDC
2016 —Single payer tries again
Bernie Sanders vaguely advocates for a single payer — or “Medicare for all” — system. Donald Trump, who once supported a single payer system, promises to provide health insurance for “everybody,” and to repeal Obamacare.
2017 —Obamacare dies (?)
It’s difficult to estimate the effects of replacing Obamacare with something else because Republicans haven’t settled on a replacement yet. Proposals do exist, though. Here’s an excellent summary of five of them.
But the effects of repealing Obamacare have been fairly well documented. Here are the results:
Coverage
The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) and the Joint Committee on Taxation (JCT) estimate that 18,000,000 people would immediately lose health insurance coverage upon repeal, and that number would grow to 32,000,000 by 2026.
Cost
According to the CBO and JCT, premiums in the nongroup market (commonly referred to as the “individual marketplace”) would rise 20%-25% upon repeal of Obamacare. Because Obamacare has slowed premium increases in the group market (e.g. employer insurance) down (see charts above), those rates will rise even more quickly.
Deficit
The CBO has estimated more than once that repealing Obamacare will result in between an increase of $353 and $474 billion in the budget deficit over the next eight years.
Benefits
Because you can’t really “just keep the good parts” of Obamacare, everything would have to go. Even the popular stuff. This means insurers would be able to deny coverage to people with “pre-existing conditions.” It means insurers could decline to provide birth control (likely resulting in an increase in abortion rates). It means insurers would be allowed to enforce lifetime and annual limits, (if you cost them too much in they can just stop paying). It means insurers could drop coverage for policyholders when they get sick. There’s a whole host of other benefits and standards that would be lost, as well.
Source
Appendix: key terms
Cost and Coverage
Our private health insurance system has two major problems: cost and coverage.
Cost: America spends more per capita on health care than any other industrialized nation. Obamacare did help slow health insurance premium increases (one part of total health costs), but hasn’t stopped them (or overall health care spending) from increasing.
Coverage: A health care system that is reliant on private health insurance will leave many people out. The exception to this is Switzerland’s private insurance system, where they have achieved universal coverage (see section on Swiss coverage halfway down the page).
Single payer
In a single payer —” Medicare for all” — system there is only one health insurance provider. It is publicly-run and has no profit motive. In other words, it’s top priority is to negotiate low rates for patients with health care providers. Proponents champion certain Medicare successes, and success from other parts of the world, as proof that single payer will work. Others disagree. Some detractors confuse the single payer insurance system with the British NHS “socialized medicine” system, in which health care providers are publicly run (e.g. hospital workers are government employees).
Private health insurance
Under Obamacare, health insurance companies are all privately run, meaning that they are all beholden to a market-based profit motive. This is why they want to restrict people with pre-existing conditions, implement lifetime caps on spending, and generally try to charge as much as possible while providing as little care as possible. They are companies, so they are required to maximize their profits. Obamacare attempts to bar them from maximizing their profits at the expense of sick people and families.
Public option
President Obama initially proposed Heritagecare with a “robust public option.” This was a compromise between single payer (where health insurance is provided by a public entity) and Heritagecare (where health insurance is provided by private entities). President Obama’s proposal called for a single publicly-run health insurance option as competition to private health insurance. The private insurers did not like this idea, and President Obama eventually compromised it away.

Republicans Push Funding Cuts For Children’s Health Insurance Program

Despite the fact that many government health programs can save money and lives, Republicans are still trying to chip away at the safety net for the least fortunate. Recently, they turned to incentives designed to help children gain access to better health care.
As part of an effort to reduce health spending by $115 billion, Republicans on the House Energy and Commerce Committee voted last week to cut $400 million from a program designed to make it easier for children in lower-income families to gain insurance through Medicaid or the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) and offer bonuses to states that see increases. According to Politico, 23 states have received bonus money for enrolling more children, with 16 of those boosting enrollment by more than 10 percent. While the proposal’s immediate future is dim, opponents say there is a chance it could resurface later on:
Although the Senate is unlikely to pick up this measure, [Executive Director of Families USA Ron] Pollack said he’s concerned it could reappear when Congress returns after the elections with a full plate of legislation in need of offsets.
 
“When you start with the House-passed budget and efforts like this, while it’s clear that they’re not going to become law, it’s just part of an opening bell about how the Republicans in the House want to handle a larger effort that will take place some time after the elections,” he said.
The lead sponsor of this bill, Rep. Joe Barton (R-TX), claimed weakening the eligibility requirements to boost coverage encouraged more people to try and game the system. But as Politico noted, the study he cited to back up his claim did not include any data specific to the bonus program Republicans are seeking to cut.
Here is what CHIP actually has done: It has helped cut the national rate of uninsured children to the lowest recorded level ever, keeping millions from losing all health coverage, and pushing long-term health costs lower. The program Republicans want to cut, meanwhile, paid out close to $300 million in bonuses last year alone and has already encouraged states to streamline their enrollment processes, eliminating bureaucratic waste.
The Republican budget presented by Rep. Paul Ryan (R-WI) would make dramatic cuts to child care funding and nutrition programs, and leave millions uninsured or underinsured.
-Zachary Bernstein

Insurance Commissioner Compares Pre-Existing Conditions To Car Wrecks: ‘It’s Your Fault’
Georgia insurance commissioner Ralph Hudgens (R) campaigning for his current job in 2010 CREDIT: AP PHOTO/ANGELA LEWIS
By Sy Mukherjee
Georgia Insurance Commissioner Ralph Hudgens (R) has a message for the estimated 57.2 million Americans suffering from diabetes, asthma, cancer, genetic disorders, and other pre-existing medical conditions: it’s your fault.
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution uncovered video of Hudgens from a November meeting at the CSRA Republican Women’s Club in Evans, Georgia in which he makes the case against the Affordable Care Act’s mandated coverage for Americans with pre-existing medical conditions. In fact, Hudgens compares requiring insurance companies to cover people with pre-existing conditions to requiring auto insurers to pay claims to any reckless drivers without comprehensive auto insurance who crash their cars:
HUDGENS: I’ve had several companies come in and they have said just the fact — just the fact — that in the individual market pre-existing conditions have to be covered on Jan. 1, that that is going to double the cost of insurance. And if you don’t really understand what covering pre-existing conditions would be like, it would be like in Georgia we have a law that says you have to have insurance on your automobile. You have to have liability insurance. If you’re going to drive on Georgia’s roads, you have to have liability insurance. You don’t have to have collision. You don’t have to have comprehensive…. But you have to have liability.
But say you’re going along and you have a wreck. And it’s your fault. Well, a pre-existing condition would be you then calling up your insurance agent and saying, ‘I would like to get collision insurance coverage on my car.’ And your insurance agent says, ‘Well, you never had that before. Why would you want it now?’ And you say, ‘Well, I just had a wreck, it was my fault and I want the insurance company to pay to repair my car.’ And that’s the exact same thing on pre-existing insurance.
Watch it:

Perhaps it isn’t surprising that Gov. Nathan Deal’s (R-GA) administration is advancing the insurance industry’s line on Obamacare. In September, Deal revealed that he had taken over half a million dollars in contributions from the health care industry through a Super PAC whose activities were kept secret until an investigative reporter uncovered corporate donations to the group over the summer. Many of those donations — including $50,000 checks from United Health Care, Inc. and WellCare of Georgia — came from major insurance companies that are opposed to Affordable Care Act’s consumer protections, like the coverage requirement for Americans with pre-existing conditions. Other donors included Humana, Blue Cross, and Aetna.
Hudgens himself has even deeper ties to insurance companies. In fact, Consumer Watchdog singled him out in a 2011 report on insurance commissioners’ relationships with the industry they regulate. It found that private insurers were Hudgens’ top supporters for his 2010 race, donating just under $150,000 to his campaign.
Over 20 percent of Americans who applied for insurance in the pre-Obamacare individual market were denied coverage due to a pre-existing condition in the 46 states that didn’t already ban those practices.
As of press time, Deal’s office had not responded to a request for comment.
Update:
Hudgens walked back his comments to the Journal-Constitution on Wednesday, saying that he’d used a “really poor analogy” that couldn’t “be further from the truth.” “I’ve had family members, I’ve had friends … who have pre-existing conditions. It’s not the person’s fault they have a pre-existing condition,” said Hudgens.

Insurance Company Pulls Actor Rob Schneider’s Ads Over His Anti-Vaccine Views
Actor Rob Schneider CREDIT: RICHARD SHOTWELL/INVISION/AP
State Farm will no longer run ads featuring Rob Schneider, the actor best known for his Saturday Night Live sketches and his roles in comedies like The Hot Chick and Grown Ups, because of backlash over his controversial views on vaccination. Schneider, who is a well-known vaccine denier, was accused of being an inappropriate spokesperson for the insurance giant.
Schneider recently resurrected one of his SNL characters for an ad campaign for State Farm, helping the company sell its “Discount Double Check” program. But that move quickly sparked criticism among public health advocates, who pointed out that Schneider has suggested that the shots lead to lasting health issues, as well as compared lawmakers to Nazis for enacting stricter vaccination requirements.
Similar myths about vaccines have been touted by other celebrities like Jenny McCarthy, Donald Trump, and Kristin Cavallari. Although those conspiracy theories been thoroughly debunked by a wide body of scientific evidence, they have effectively influenced the opinions of an increasing number of U.S. parents who are opting to skip their kids’ recommended shots — a trend that health officials say has led to a rise in vaccine preventable diseases like measles and whooping cough throughout the country.
In light of that persistent public health issue, activists started a social media campaign urging State Farm to end their affiliation with the actor. “State Farm provides health insurance, and nothing ensures public health more than getting vaccinated,” a video produced by the social media group Chow Babe, which fights against vaccine denial, noted. “If you have a State Farm policy, contact your agent and demand that someone who publicly states dangerous opinions should not be a spokesperson for a health insurance company.”
Critics soon flooded State Farm’s Facebook page. “Time to get a new spokesperson. Rob Schneider’s anti-medicine stances are dangerous and false,” one user wrote. “Would I buy anything health related from a spokesman who doesn’t believe in vaccines? That’s pretty ridiculous,” another commented.
The State Farm ad featuring Rob Schneider that will no longer run CREDIT: Screenshot
This week, State Farm gave into the pressure and pulled the ad. The company’s director of public affairs told PRWeek that Scneider’s ad “has unintentionally been used as a platform for discussion unrelated to the products and services we provide” and that’s why State Farm is “working to remove the ad from our rotation at this time.”
Rob Schneider has not officially responded to State Farm’s decision, but appeared to tweet a thinly veiled reference to the controversy on Tuesday night. “If the Freedom of Speech is taken away then dumb and silent we may be led, like sheep to the slaughter,” the actor posted on his account, quoting George Washington.
A similar controversy unfolded earlier this year when the restaurant Chili’s announced a partnership with an organization that promotes the false link between vaccines and autism. After massive public outcry over Chili’s proceeds potentially going toward an anti-vaccine group, the chain canceled the partnership based on “feedback” from its guests.
Despite the fact that inoculation remains controversial in certain circles, the scientific community considers vaccines to be one of the most important public health advances in the modern world. Vaccinating kids over the past two decades has prevented more than 700,000 of them from dying, and has virtually eradicated diseases like polio that were once serious threats in the United States. Thanks to what’s called “herd immunity,” which refers to the fact that an increase in vaccinated individuals can protect people who haven’t gotten their shots, vaccinating children helps keep their entire families healthier.

How Obamacare Helped Paul, A Homeless California Man, Finally Get Insurance
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
By Scott Keyes
SAN FRANCISCO, California — Hope isn’t an insurance policy.
This is the lesson that Paul, a 55-year-old San Francisco man with thin, wispy hair reminiscent of a benevolent mad scientist, learned three years ago when his closest friend died from cancer. She was diagnosed in early 2010. Four months later, lacking insurance and any means to pay for care, she died.
“That was an unbelievable eye-opener for me,” he said.
Most Americans are insured through their jobs. For them, getting health insurance is a convenience, the only cost a slightly-diminished paycheck every two weeks. Not for Paul. He doesn’t have money for a place to live, much less health coverage.
Things weren’t always bad for Paul, who preferred not to divulge his last name or have his photo taken. He had worked for a big technology company for years. When layoffs came following the dot-com bubble, he took a buyout and used the money to start his own IT consulting business. It was “thriving,” he explained. That is, until demand dried up after the 2008 market crash. His business went under and he was soon evicted by his landlords.
Once a paragon of Silicon Valley’s promise, he became emblematic of its often-ignored side: those who have been left behind.
“I never imagined I would wind up homeless,” he said, mournfully. After all, he’d grown up in a well-off middle class family and was remarkably resourceful, teaching himself computer science to take advantage of the tech boom.
He has been homeless for nearly five years, sleeping in his car and trying every day to find work. It’s been 12 years since he had health insurance. For Paul, health care has meant aspiring, an annual flu shot, and confidence he won’t get sick.
And even though he says he doesn’t feel like he’s in his mid-50s — “I’m 55, going on 28,” Paul joked — his best friend showed him just how dangerous it is to rely on hope.
How Obamacare will help
On Monday, Paul showed up at Project Homeless Connect, a services fair for homeless people held near the Castro district of San Francisco, unsure of what he’d find.
Paul had tried numerous times, unsuccessfully, to get health coverage over the past few years. The problem is that, even though he had no health care, no home, and no assets, he still wasn’t eligible for California’s Medicaid program, Medi-Cal. That’s because for years, only people who were elderly, disabled, or had dependent children were eligible for Medi-Cal. Childless adults like Paul were excluded from the system.
That is, until Obamacare.
One of the most important reforms in the Affordable Care Act is the expansion of Medicaid to cover anyone with an income at or below 133 percent of the federal poverty level. That currently stands at $15,282 for an individual or $31,322 for a family of four. (Last year, the Supreme Court ruled that states can choose not to comply with the Medicaid expansion; approximately half of states have blocked expansion, despite the fact that it’s fully-funded by the federal government for the first three years.)
For folks like Paul who were among the 45 million people in 2010 without health insurance because they weren’t covered by Medicaid and couldn’t come anywhere near being able to afford individual insurance, Obamacare is nothing short of a miracle.
I ran into Paul after his consultation with SF PATH, a federally-funded insurance program that has served low-income San Franciscans, but will automatically roll over all its enrollees into Medi-Cal beginning on January 1, 2014.
Even as some in the media have focused on technical glitches to paint Obamacare as hopelessly flawed, that was hardly Paul’s experience. After trying and failing to get health coverage for years, all it took was a brief sit-down for Paul to get enrolled.
“It was unbelievably easy,” he told ThinkProgress. “Five minutes.”
Health insurance won’t immediately transform Paul’s life. It won’t give him a permanent place to live. It won’t get him a job. But it will prevent his life from completely unraveling if he were to get injured or sick. It’s one less worry in an already-stressful life.
Especially for the poor, health care is both a necessity and a luxury. And thanks to Obamacare, the safety net won’t just be for those who can afford it.

why insurance won’t cover alternative medicine
As the government eyes healthcare reform to address today’s problems in coverage and expenses, there’s a group of lobbyists representing an unusual set of clients who want their services covered in insurance plans. It seems that acupuncturists, chiropractors, homeopaths and even faith healers want your visits to be covered so they can attract more patients to their alternative practices. Today, if you want to see an alternative medicine practitioner, you have to pay out of your pocket, but if your insurance company will subsidize your visit, odds are you may be more willing to come and see them. Whatever per service revenue they lose in negotiations, they’ll gain in volume. However, their case might be lost before it’s even considered in a Congressional hearing.

Insurance companies base their coverage on sets of guidelines that are created by physicians and reviewed for anything questionable or objectionable. Before the companies are willing to pick up their part of the tab for a new treatment, they want to know that it works, that it will improve the quality of life and that it makes sense. For them to do anything else is just gambling with their money and hence, they try to rely on evidence-based medicine as much as they possibly can. How can their guidelines track something as obscure as spiritual or holistic health? And why should they cover something that scientists and doctors are sure doesn’t work past the placebo effect? We’re talking about companies that will think twice about giving you a new kidney. Do any of the alternative medicine advocates really think the same companies will want to cover New Age medicine?
The same insurance companies have their own powerful lobbies and armies of political allies who can throw a lot more money and a lot more weight around Washington DC. Currently, alternative medicine proponents have only one serious supporter, Senator Tom Harkin (D-IA). And while they might sway some congressmen and women with a passionate presentation or two, representatives of insurance companies will be ready to line up expert after expert who will truthfully tell them there’s no solid proof that alternative medicine is on par with conventional medical practices and that faith healing is a religious tenet rather than a valid practice that has any place in a hospital. Why then should the government ask insurance companies to cover these ideas? And what politician would want the negative press that would come with advocating something like this?

Half Of Americans Don’t Understand The Most Common Terms Related To Health Insurance
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
If the American people were required to take “Health Insurance 101,” half of them would fail it.
According to a new poll conducted by the Harris Institute on behalf of the American Institute of CPAs, many Americans can’t correctly define the basic financial terms that relate to their health insurance plans. Half of U.S. adults don’t know what a premium, deductible, or co-pay is.
Thirty four percent of participants thought a premium was an expense at the time of receiving medical service or a prescription (in fact, that’s a co-pay). Twenty four percent thought a co-pay was the cost of obtaining insurance (nope, that’s a premium). Twelve percent didn’t realize that a deductible is the amount of money you have to pay before an insurance company will start making payments.
The new poll did find that knowledge of those three insurance-related terms increased with education levels. But regardless of education, Americans have typically struggled to understand the complexities of the health insurance system as a whole.
Another recent study from a health care economist at Carnegie Mellon University found that even when people think they have a good understanding of how health care works, they’re often wrong. For instance, although 100 percent of the people who participated in the study thought they knew what a co-pay was, only 72 percent of them actually did. And hardly any of them could successfully navigate a hypothetical insurance plan to figure out what a four-day hospital stay would cost.
“I have a PhD in economics and I’ve spent a bunch of time giving insurance companies feedback about policies, and I still find them difficult to understand,” the Carnegie Melon professor, George Loewenstein, pointed out in an interview with Wonkblog. “I assumed that extrapolating from myself that the average American individual would have an even lower understanding.”
The health reform law takes some steps to attempt to address this issue. Obamacare requires insurers to provide a “Summary of Benefits and Coverage” that explains how the plan works in plain language. Insurers will also be required to distribute a glossary of common health care terms that will be uniform across different plans. The hope is that Americans will be more able to easily figure out exactly what they’re getting with their current benefit plan, compare it to other health care options, and decide whether it makes sense stick with it.
Improving Americans’ health care literacy is going to be especially important in light of the upcoming changes under Obamacare. The new state-wide insurance marketplaces will open for enrollment in October, but most Americans still don’t know much about health reform will affect them, and they aren’t getting their information from Obamacare from sources they actually trust.

Despite Hazard of Sea Level Rise, Senate Halts Flood Insurance Reforms
CREDIT: AP PHOTO / ELISE AMENDOLA
Just days after President Barack Obama made his boldest statements yet on climate change during his State of the Union address — calling it “a fact” and demanding we “act with more urgency” to address impacts like increasingly frequent coastal flooding — the Senate voted to delay reforms to the troubled National Flood Insurance Program.
By a vote of 67 to 32, the Senate passed the Homeowner Flood Insurance Affordability Act of 2014 on Thursday, a bill that effectively halts reforms to the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) enacted just two years ago. The measure would delay implementation of flood insurance rate increases that were part of the Biggert-Waters Act of 2012 by about four years, calling for an affordability study to be conducted by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
The Biggert-Waters Act aimed to address the insolvency of the NFIP by requiring that flood insurance premiums reflect actual flood risk and thus raising rates in certain areas. Under the current program, the federal government underwrites flood insurance at rates far below what homeowners would have to pay on the open market for $527 billion worth of properties that lie in the coastal floodplain — part of the $1.2 trillion in assets insured overall under the NFIP. Recently, due to costly extreme events such as Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Sandy, the NFIP has gone deep into the red and is in debt to taxpayers by about $24 billion.
Just last week the GAO released a report finding:
The financial reforms included in the act [Biggert-Waters] could go a long way toward reducing the financial exposure created by the program, but they will be phased in over time and in order to be fully effective, FEMA will need to successfully implement them.
The potential losses generated by NFIP have created substantial financial exposure for the federal government and U.S. taxpayers. While Congress and FEMA intended that NFIP be funded with premiums collected from policyholders and not with tax dollars, the program was, by design, not actuarially sound.
Now those 2012 reforms are in jeopardy as legislators from both sides of the aisle have been swayed by arguments from their constituents about the rising premiums associated with the reforms. In particular, low- and middle-income homeowners are seeing rate increases that may make their monthly payments unaffordable, and in turn could drive down property values and hurt regional economies.
The bill that passed the Senate on Thursday would delay the premium increases, which were scheduled to be phased in starting next year, and allow homeowners to pass along below-cost policies if they sell their home. During the debate of the bill, legislators proposed ideas to address the problem of affordability while keeping the reforms in place. Senator Pat Toomey (R-PA) argued for his amendment, which would cap the existing premium increases to 25 percent a year until it met the new rates, saying the gradual phase-in “gives people time to adjust, time to mitigate, time to challenge if the map is drawn wrong.” This flexibility is also supported by by the White House; however, the amendment failed by a vote of 34–65.
A range of voices, from insurance groups to environmentalists, have suggested that halting the reforms made by Biggert-Waters would fail to solve the problem of an indebted program that leaves coastal property owners at risk and the taxpayer on the hook for paying the bill.
“Rather than irresponsibly delaying reforms, which the CBO estimates would cost billions, the Reinsurance Associate of America supports targeted reforms to help homeowners most in need, while maintaining the benefits of risk-based rates and incentivizing community and individual mitigation,” states Frank Nutter, president of the organization.
As coastal populations and sea levels continue to rise, so too will the cost of protecting homes and communities from flooding and extreme weather events. Scientists estimate that sea level will rise 3 feet on average worldwide by the end of the century. Yet, like politics, sea level rise is local and some areas may have more cause for concern. Researchers have found that areas of the East Coast are seeing greater measured levels of rising seas than the global average — and a Rutgers-led team estimates that up to 1.5 feet is anticipated along the New Jersey shore by 2050 and the rate of increase is unprecedented than any time in the past 4 thousand years.
“Sea level is changing and it is going to keep changing regardless of who or what is causing it,” says William Sweet an oceanographer at NOAA. “And the impacts are going to become more and more frequent and severe and we’re going to have to deal with it.”

In States That Won’t Expand Medicaid, Some Health Care Workers Can’t Even Get Insurance
CREDIT: AP PHOTO/RICK BOWMER, FILE
By Sam P.K. Collins
Somewhat ironically, many of the direct-care workers living in states that haven’t accepted Obamacare’s optional Medicaid expansion can’t afford insurance benefits to ensure them the same quality of care given to the elderly and people with disabilities.
According to a new report released by the Paraprofessional Healthcare Institute (PHI) this week, more than 400,000 direct-care workers don’t have coverage, some of whom because they live in states that haven’t expanded Medicaid, which is a key tenet of the Affordable Care Act.
The report, titled “Too Sick to Care: Direct-Care Workers, Medicaid Expansion, and the Coverage Gap,” argues that the 21 states that have failed to expand Medicaid are missing an opportunity to improve work conditions and raise morale, so that home health workers can meet the needs of a growing patient base.
“In spite of all of the successes of the Affordable Care Act, making access to affordable health coverage possible for millions of people, nearly a half million hardworking direct-care workers who happen to live in states that have rejected Medicaid expansion are shut out of affordable coverage,” Abby Marquand, PHI’s director of policy research, wrote in a press release. “Direct-care workers are providing some of the most essential care to our nation’s elders and people with disabilities — experiencing high rates of on-the-job injuries, regularly exposed to communicable disease — and many can’t get the health care they need.”
Direct-care workers — many of whom are women, African American, or Latino — are less likely to get insurance through their employers, but they also struggle to earn enough money to purchase insurance on their own.
These health care professionals work closely with their patients in homes, nursing facilities, and hospitals for long periods of time. Unpredictable, part-time work hours reduce average pay, making median earnings for the nation’s more than 2 million home workers plummet to just $13,000 per year, according to a February PHI report.
The now-defunct Direct Care Alliance describes health care as a crucial benefit to the direct-care worker workforce, which suffers some of the nation’s highest rates of on-the-job injuries — caused by lifting and moving patients. Other workplace hazards include physical assault and threats, both of which can cause physical and mental trauma. A lack of provisions to address workplace safety also complicates efforts to create a stable environment for direct care workers. Health care advocates say such situations require time away from work and access to adequate medical services.
The Medicaid program, about to mark its 50th anniversary, has been of great significance to direct-care workers. Last year, the Obama Administration implemented rules that would ensure wage and hour protections and improvements for working conditions for direct-care workers. The rule would cost $6.8 million annually over a 10-year period, according to the U.S. Department of Labor — an investment that supporters said would reduce turnover and improve quality of care.
“The direct-care workforce is unique in the sense that Medicaid is paying the agencies that pay these workers,” Marquand told ThinkProgress. “States that recognize the value of this workforce can target Medicaid funds directly to worker wages and benefits and increase access to affordable health insurance.”
Under the ACA, states receive additional federal funding when they expand their Medicaid programs to include adults under 65 with income up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level. While a 2012 U.S. Supreme Court decision upheld the Medicaid portion of the ACA, Medicaid expansion now rested in state lawmakers’ hands. In the 21 states that have yet to expand Medicaid, low-income residents don’t have viable alternatives to coverage, especially if they fall within what’s known as the coverage gap — which means they have incomes above the Medicaid eligibility threshold but below the lower limit for Marketplace tax credits.
Even so, lawmakers in some states have been reluctant to expand coverage, due to a concern that they would shoulder costs, even with the Obama Administration’s assurances that their expenditures would be covered. Those states have spent less than expected on Medicaid benefits because they aren’t adding as many patients to the roll. Nearly 4 million people — many of whom hail from African-American and Latino communities in the South — don’t have access to affordable coverage because they fall within the coverage gap.
But all of that could soon change in some states. For instance, Democrats in South Carolina energized by the removal of the Confederate flag from the Statehouse grounds renewed a push to pass Medicaid expansion for nearly 200,000 adults. If it comes to fruition, that victory would follow similar acts that transpired in other states. Last month, Alaska Governor Bill Walker used his executive might to expand Medicaid. Montana Governor Steve Bullock extended Medicaid coverage to 45,000 residents when he signed a bill that received bipartisan support.
“You see a lot more conversations happening. States are grappling with the significance of having a large population of people living in poverty without access to health insurance,” Marquand said. “I’m hopeful that some form of Medicaid expansion could happen in those 21 states. It’s not about expanding government programs for the sake of it but ensuring all people have access to affordable health care, especially health care workers.”

Feds Tell Insurance Companies That Transgender People Need Mammograms Too
Denee Mallon, an Army veteran who fought for transgender-related care under Medicare, marches with other advocates for transgender equality in May, 2014. CREDIT: AP PHOTO/CRAIG FRITZ
Transgender people face two prominent hurdles to equitable health care: coverage of procedures related to their actual gender transition (hormones, surgery, etc.) and coverage of sex-specific procedures that are as important for transgender people as for others, like mammograms, prostate exams, and cervical Pap tests. New guidance issued this week from the Departments of Health and Human Services, Labor, and the Treasury affirms that insurance companies must provide the services in this second category without discriminating on the basis of gender identity.
When a doctor or other health care provider determines that an exam is medically appropriate for a patient, the guidance instructs, “the plan or issuer must provide coverage for the recommended preventive service, without cost sharing, regardless of sex assigned at birth, gender identity, or gender of the individual otherwise recorded by the plan or issuer.” A talking point memo accompanying the guidance offers, “This means, for example, that a transgender man with an intact cervix can get coverage without cost sharing for a pap smear, if recommended by his provider.”
The transgender guidance, couched in guidance about providing contraception to women, could make a profound difference for transgender individuals who have struggled to obtain the preventive medical care they need. It will protect people like Beth Scott and Jennifer Blair, who had to pay out-of-pocket for a mammogram and then go to court to have the costs reimbursed. In cases like theirs, coverage is often denied simply because of how gender is designated on their insurance ID cards.
In the 2011 National Transgender Discrimination Survey, a full 50 percent of respondents reported that they had postponed pursuing preventive care services because they could not afford it. This included a transgender man who was told by Blue Cross of California, “Unfortunately we are unable to process claims for one member under both genders,” and thus he could not be covered for procedures related to his anatomy. One 55-year-old transgender man was denied coverage for a bone density scan because according to the insurer’s policies, only women could qualify as “at-risk” for osteoporosis. Another transgender man sought treatment for an infection from an LGBT-friendly health provider; when he asked for additional preventive services, he was told that because his documents identify him as male, it wasn’t possible to submit a claim for a Pap test without compromising coverage for the other tests and treatments he received related to the infection.
This gender marker issue has created so many technical problems for trans people accessing the health care that they need that Medicare actually implemented an “override” code to correct the glitches. Since 2012, providers can note in the records that any conflict based on gender markers should be ignored, communicating that the service was not provided in error and allowing the claim to be processed without interruption.
The Affordable Care Act has great potential to end health care discrimination against transgender people, but gender markers have provided a kind of loophole for that discrimination to persist. Those whose income is low enough that they qualify for advanced premium tax credits must show the same gender marker on their health insurance policy as is associated with their social security card. As a result of this paperwork technicality, they have then been denied the sex-specific services prescribed by their doctors because the procedure doesn’t match their recorded gender.
Transgender people are increasingly finding enumerated protections in state health exchanges, but progress has been slow and uncertain. The new guidance will help them overcome the financial and procedural hurdles that have obstructed them from accessing the same preventive health services cisgender people regularly expect to be covered by their health care coverage.

Protecting Social Security Disability Insurance

On the first day of the 114th Congress, the Republicans in the House of Representatives made an unprecedented change to their rules that puts Social Security recipients at risk of receiving unnecessary cuts to their benefits. The House rule prevents funds from being reallocated between the Old Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Disability Insurance Trust Fund, as has been previously done numerous times in the past on a bipartisan basis, unless such a move improves the “financial health of the combined Social Security Trust Funds.” Though innocuous sounding, in reality this almost certainly means cuts to Social Security. There are two ways to improve the health of the combined Trust Funds. You can bring in new revenues or you can cut benefits. The vast majority of Republicans have categorically rejected new revenues, meaning that the rule change will likely lead millions of beneficiaries to face benefit cuts. According to the Social Security Administration in 2013 over 2.6 million Pennsylvanians received Social Security benefits, including over 400,000 on Social Security Disability Insurance.
Without question we need to find a way to improve the solvency of the Social Security program and I look forward to working with my colleagues on the Finance Committee to do this. But it is also without question that this will not be done by mean-spirited partisan actions that pit one group of beneficiaries against the other. Beneficiaries in both programs have worked hard and paid into the system. We owe them real answers to real problems. Let us work together to strengthen both programs and provide security to millions of Americans.

The BRCA Gene, Our Mother, And Our Insurance Plans: A Chat Between Sisters
by Hannah Killian and Meredith Askey


On Monday, Angelina Jolie quietly published an op-ed in the New York Times in which she admitted to undergoing a preventative double mastectomy. Jolie, whose mother died from breast cancer, carries the “faulty” BRCA1 gene, which increases the risk of developing breast cancer and ovarian cancer.
Our own mother was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2006. She had radiation and chemotherapy and has now been cancer-free for more than five years, but last year she tested positive for the BRCA2 mutation, and she is petrified that she has passed it on to us (we’re 26 and 30 years old). She desperately wants us to get tested for the gene, and has offered to pay the costs. She’s been on us for months about calling her oncologist.
We’ve been putting it off, though, and when Jolie’s piece came out we were reminded of our mother’s mission. We chat throughout the day while we’re both at work. Yesterday our talk was about the BRCA gene, what a positive result might mean for us, and how it might affect our health care coverage now and in the future. We learned a lot.
Tuesday, May 14, 2013–9:27 AM
Hannah: Hey have you done anything about getting tested for that breast cancer gene thingy?
Meredith: I haven’t, although Mom reminded me again on Sunday.
Hannah: I can think of about 5,000 things I’d rather spend that money on, but I hear that preventative stuff is good for you or something.
Meredith: I want to call my insurance company to find out what will be covered and to what extent. Mom acts like thinking about the cost is ridiculous.
Hannah: Well, she said she’d pay for it, didn’t she?
Meredith: Yes, but I still want to know going in
And what if we have the gene, and [mom’s oncologist] recommends immediate yearly mammograms but insurance still doesn’t cover it until age 35? Is mom planning to pay for all those mammograms?
Hannah: I don’t know, dude.
Meredith: I don’t think she believes there’s a chance it won’t be covered, whereas I’m almost positive there will be at least some out-of-pocket costs that will add up to a lot.
1:47 PM
Meredith: Another question to ask: If you test positive, that becomes a pre-existing condition for you. I have insurance through my job, but you technically have an individual plan.
You need to ask what it would mean for your rates the next time you renew or if you would need to switch insurance.
2:06 PM
Meredith: Hey, the test is not covered for me at all until my deductible is met, which it is not yet. They’re calling me back by tomorrow to estimate how much it would cost.
if MY insurance doesn’t cover it, I am preeeeeety sure yours won’t
2:25 PM
Hannah: My deductible is $2500 and they’ll cover 80% after that. so: not covered.
Meredith: Right. They do have to mail me an authorization form, so make sure you get that awhile if you need it.
Hannah: I doubt I asked the right questions. he kept going on about needing the code to give me more information, but just gave me the basic information for a diagnostic test
Meredith: I said I wanted to get tested for the BRCA breast cancer gene because my mother has a positive test, and was that covered?
and she said it would be covered at 90% after my deductible is met, and that she needed to send me an authorization form that either I or my doctor could fill out and return before actually doing the test.
Hannah: yeah… that’s basically what I said. he said he needed a code.
Meredith: I think there are different combos of procedure codes they might use to bill for this test
Hannah: Well, this is honestly the first time in my life I’ve thought about combination procedure codes.
it’s just so weird. like… if Facebook were this complicated to use, no one would have Facebook
Meredith: BINGO
and it’s to their advantage that it’s hard for you to use, because most people just trust what the bill says when they pay for healthcare.
Did you not even bother asking about the pre-existing condition thing?
Hannah: Uttering the phrase pre-existing condition did not even cross my mind. How do you know how to do this stuff? did I not read some pamphlet about adult-y questions to ask?
Meredith: I don’t, but I hear things on the news
Hannah: I read the news but am very self-centered and believe it doesn’t apply to me.
Meredith: Like, as long as you have continuous coverage you can’t be refused coverage
but I don’t know whether on an individual plan like you have they can use a new condition like that to raise your rates
And I would like some more info from [mom’s oncologist] first, I think, because if your healthcare decisions wouldn’t change in any way until you hit 35, then I think maybe it’s NOT worth it for you to get tested yet
The risk of having this as a pre-existing condition if you wouldn’t start getting mammograms until age 30 or 35 anyway is not worth it for you.
Hannah: I realize that I am young and that I am self-centered and that I do not fully grasp the concept of my own mortality
But this, to me, just seems like the most absurd thing to spend money on
There is really just something that rubs me the entirely wrong way about spending thousands of dollars on a test for something that possibly could or could not happen in the future when there are gazillions of other things to spend thousands of dollars on
is it absurdly naive to say that I would rather mom donate this money for someone else to get medical care in a developing nation rather than spend it on me to get some test?
I realize that mom is my mother and doesn’t see it that way. She wants to help me — her child and little girl — but I just am having trouble wrapping my head around the absurdity of the situation.
Meredith: I truly think she will not let herself see that this is NOT a cut-and-dry decision
Hannah: I do not want to just jump in to the test
Meredith: me neither, I want to know exactly what it would mean if it was positive first
and not just what it would mean for our risk, but what it would mean in terms of recommended treatment — like, when would they want to start screenings
and there MUST be more to consider beyond “have your ovaries removed as soon as you’re done having children.” I want to know what less invasive screening options there are
Hannah: I guess I just don’t even think about my health that much besides recognizing that I would be a little healthier if I lost a few pounds
Meredith: right: you’re a cliched reasonably healthy 20-something
Hannah: I will happily be that cliche
Meredith: It makes no sense to me to get this test before the results would change anything about your current healthcare. Maybe with a positive test they’d recommend a mammogram right away and every few years to establish a baseline before regular mammograms start at age 35? But even if that would be the recommendation, I wonder if it would be more cost-effective to not risk the pre-existing condition.
I mean, so if you have the BRCA2 that means your overall risk for getting cancer sometime in your life is much higher, but it’s still not a high risk of developing cancer before you’re, say, 30. and even with the gene that’s pretty rare. LESS rare, but still rare
Hannah: I think that a consult with [mom’s oncologist] should be our next step
because she will look at this more scientifically and logically like you do
and not mom’s “MY BABIES HAVE CANCER AND ARE GOING TO DIE!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!”
Meredith: I just need to remind myself to not get annoyed at mom about it
like, it’s not OK to respond to her with anything beyond “OK yes we are going to go get tested ASAP”
And I am thinking about it from [a mother’s] standpoint. maybe I’ll feel differently if I do test positive, but I don’t think so. [My daughter] is absolutely not getting tested for this until she’s an adult and can make the decision for herself. Plus, who knows what advances in treatment will have happened by then.
Seriously, this is exactly the point in GATTACA
did you see that movie?
Hannah: I have not seen Gattaca
Meredith: Where do you draw the line for treating people differently when you know their genome and therefore know the traits they have a higher or lower tendency towards?
There aren’t good regulations in place for what it is and isn’t OK to assume about people once their genome is mapped
like, it should NOT, in my opinion, change your access to health insurance if you should test positive for this gene. But it does.
and even after Obamacare makes it illegal to refuse insurance based on pre-existing conditions, they can still charge you way more for it
I do believe healthcare is a right, but I do think there are major grey areas — like, if you choose to smoke your whole life and you get lung cancer? Or you have a heart attack at age 40 because you eat three Big Macs a day? That’s understandably something people don’t want to pay for
but EVERYONE makes SOME imperfect decisions about their health, and there’s often not one clear cause of major health problems, so it’s not possible to determine how much the individual is at fault
so what do you do about that? obviously you and I can’t control whether we have the BRCA2 mutation or not
but what if they found that you could lower your risk back to normal by eating nothing but broccoli and carrots for the rest of your life? Should it be my responsibility to follow that very restrictive diet? Even though I now have a much harder job than the average person?
Or should it be the responsibility of the healthcare system to screen me more so that I can keep eating normal food?
No easy answer.
THESE ARE THE THINGS THAT MAKE PEOPLE FREAK OUT ABOUT TURNING 30 HANNAH wtf
Hannah: dude.
Chat has been condensed and edited. Image via Flickr.
Meredith Askey is a data analyst and mom. Hannah Killian is a librarian and aunt. Last month they saw Matilda the Musical together. This morning, they made consultation appointments with their mother’s oncologist.


As Ballet Stretches Her Body’s Limits, Insurance Brings Peace of Mind
BY HEIDI DE MARCO
Allynne Noelle has had two metatarsal stress fractures, a torn foot ligament, and two broken ribs. Yet, the 32-year-old ballerina considers herself pretty lucky.
Noelle says not to be fooled by the graceful movements on stage − ballet is a full-contact sport.
“As beautiful as the art form of ballet is, it’s extremely demanding on the body,” said Noelle, a principal dancer with the Los Angeles ballet. “It works every single muscle and fiber.”
The annual injury rates at ballet companies run between 67 and 95 percent, according to a study by the American Journal of Sports Medicine. But ballerinas and their male counterparts often dance through the pain.
“You’re kind of raised with the idea that you’re stronger than any pain you feel,” said Noelle, who once danced with a 103-degree fever that led to her hospitalization with pneumonia.
Despite her tough-it-out training, she’d prefer to have insurance. So by the time the Affordable Care Act took effect, allowing her ballet company to buy a plan, Noelle was eager to sign up.
Ballerina Allynne Noelle snapped her Lisfranc ligament during a performance, but the 32-year-old said adrenaline masked the pain (Photo by Heidi de Marco/KHN).
‘All I’ve Ever Wanted To Do’
At just 15, Noelle became a professional dancer, working her way up to a coveted spot with big city ballet companies. “It’s all I’ve ever wanted to do,” she said.
But her luck turned in 2009 when her Lisfranc ligament — in her mid-foot — tore during a performance in Miami. She kept dancing. “I don’t really remember it happening, I think it was the adrenaline,” recalled Noelle.
She didn’t realize how badly hurt she was until she became unable to perform with the National Ballet of Canada the following year. At 28, Noelle found herself back in California — off stage and without a contract.
Doctors replaced scar tissue in her right foot with an artificial ligament. Her surgery and rehabilitation were covered by workers’ compensation. But other than that, Noelle had no health coverage and felt buying an individual health plan was out of the question.
“Ballet dancers do not make a fortune for a living,” said Noelle, who says she now earns less than $40,000 a year. “It’s definitely a labor of love for us.”
Allynne Noelle, principal ballerina with the Los Angeles Ballet, has had two broken ribs. One partner squeezed her rib too hard and it broke in the middle of a lift. The second rib gave out during a repetitive dance movement (Photo by Heidi de Marco/KHN).
By 2011, Noelle was back on stage with the Los Angeles Ballet. The company didn’t offer coverage at the time, so she went uninsured for almost four years.
She went to Planned Parenthood for preventive care, such as general check-ups or to get a Z-Pak, a common antibiotic, when she got sick. “It was a bit of a struggle,” she said. “Prescriptions are extremely expensive when you don’t have insurance.”
Between rent, a car payment, and everyday bills, the Santa Monica resident said it was a “complete impossibility” to buy health insurance.
“Every dance company should make health insurance a priority for their dancers,” said Noelle, her hair up in a bun, dressed elegantly in a flesh-toned leotard, a crimson top and a plain white tutu.
Ballet shoes have a hard base made of layers of paper, leather, or burlap. Allynne Noelle said ballerinas often suffer from Achilles tendinitis and ankle sprains. “It’s not uncommon to hear snap,” she said (Photo by Heidi de Marco/KHN).
Not Platinum Program But ‘It’s A Start’
Julie Whittaker, executive director of the Los Angeles Ballet, was sympathetic to her dancers’ health concerns.
A native of Canada, Whittaker grew up with government-fundedhealth care. Having to pay for care was the biggest adjustment she had to make, psychologically and financially, after moving to the U.S.
“We’ve always wanted to look after our dancers,” she said. “It was just not something we could afford, until the ACA came along.”
Using an insurance broker, the nonprofit performing arts organization signed up in early December for California’s Small Business Health Options Program, created under the health law.
Whittaker said group insurance may be less expensive under SHOP. “Plus, it’s much less complicated and time consuming than applying for quotes from separate companies,” she said.
Principal dancer Allynne Noelle was uninsured for almost four years, until the Los Angele Ballet offered her coverage under the Affordable Care Act. She thinks every ballet company should make health insurance a priority for their dancers (Photo by Heidi de Marco/KHN).
The ballet company purchased a plan with a $6,000 monthly premium for 35 dancers and 8 staff members.
“We certainly don’t have the platinum program,” Whittaker said. “We have the bronze,” the least expensive type of plan. “But it’s a start.”
The plan covers primary and preventive care at no cost to the employees. It offers them a choice between Blue Shield and Kaiser Permanente.
Noelle chose Blue Shield, and although she feels the $5,000 deductible is “extremely high” for her, she’s relieved.
“This new coverage is a peace of mind,” she said. “It will save me from drowning in medical bills.”
She still thinks the plan is lacking some fundamental services for dancers, including sports psychology. “There’s a lot of pressure to perform consistently, at a super human level,” she said.
Noelle has yet to use her plan, but said she will absolutely take advantage of it.
“Our entire career is our body,” she said.
http://bcove.me/9wh1wq9c

Heritage Foundation: ‘Mandate All Households To Obtain Adequate Insurance’

Our guest blogger is Paul Breer, a former ThinkProgress intern.
The Heritage Foundation’s website declares that the individual mandate “violates personal liberty” and is “inherently at odds with the original vision of the Framers,” but they conveniently forget to mention that the individual mandate was actually their idea. In 1989, the Heritage’s Stuart M. Butler gave a lecture titled “Assuring Affordable Health Care for All Americans.” Stuart’s lecture disclosed Heritage’s plan to reform the health care system, which called for an individual mandate:
If a young man wrecks his Porsche and has not had the foresight to obtain insurance, we may commiserate but society feels no obligation to repair his car. But health care is different. If a man is struck down by a heart attack in the street, Americans will care for him whether or not he has insurance. If we find that he has spent his money on other things rather than insurance, we may be angry but we will not deny him services — even if that means more prudent citizens end up paying the tab.
Many states now…require anybody driving a car to have liability insurance. But neither the federal government nor any state requires all households to protect themselves from the potentially catastrophic costs of a serious accident or illness. Under the Heritage plan, there would be such a requirement…Mandate all households to obtain adequate insurance.
Even Newt Gingrich admitted in the Republican debate on Oct. 20 that the individual mandate originally came from the conservative Heritage Foundation. In fact, many Republicans in the 1990s, including Charles Grassley (R-IA), Orrin Hatch (R-UT), Bob Dole (R-KS), and Richard Lugar (R-IN), supported a national requirement for health insurance. As ThinkProgress’ Igor Volsky writes, many of the GOP presidential candidates have supported the individual mandate, including Romney, Gingrich, Huntsman, and former candidate Tim Pawlenty.
Showing just how far to the right the Republicans have moved, the Heritage Foundation originally touted the individual mandate as a way to help “those who need it most” and make the “health care industry as efficient and consumer sensitive as possible.” But now, from David Brooks calling his own Party not “fit to govern” to Pat Roberts calling the GOP field too “extreme,” Republicans are moving so fast to the right that their own ideas can’t keep up.

Michigan Is Hardly The First State To Pass A ‘Rape Insurance’ Law
CREDIT: AP PHOTO/MANUEL BALCE CENETA
Michigan has recently been thrust into the national spotlight, now that state lawmakers have approved a measure requiring women to buy a separate insurance rider for abortion coverage. That restriction has been widely decried as a cruel and misogynistic policy, particularly since it doesn’t include an exception for victims of rape. Opponents have referred to it as a “rape insurance” law, emphasizing the particular burden that it places on victims of sexual assault. Pro-choice groups are considering a petition drive to attempt to repeal it.
That’s certainly been an effective messaging strategy to rally opposition to the legislation. A lot of people are fired up about “rape insurance.” But Michigan is hardly the only state that bars women from using their insurance plans to cover abortion care. It’s not even the only one that doesn’t make any exceptions for rape victims. On the contrary, this is actually quite a common policy on the state level.
First of all, it’s important to understand that restricting insurance coverage for abortion is an extremely popular method of cutting off access to reproductive rights. This type of indirect barrier to abortion access doesn’t seem as dramatic as a sweeping ban on abortion, and that’s why it doesn’t tend to grab as many headlines. But make no mistake: The anti-choice community is serious about making this type of reproductive care too expensive for most women to afford. Since an abortion procedure can cost anywhere between $300 and $10,000 out-of-pocket, one of the easiest ways to price individuals out of their abortion rights is to prevent them from using their health insurance to pay for it.
Low-income women in the country already face this reality. Thanks to the Hyde Amendment, federal dollars aren’t allowed to fund abortion, so most poor Americans can’t use their publicly-funded health insurance to cover an abortion. Thirty two states and the District of Columbia follow that federal standard for their state-based Medicaid programs. Many of these women simply don’t have the means to pay for the full cost of ending a pregnancy, and some end up being forced to carry their unwanted pregnancies to term.
And this type of abortion restriction has been steadily advancing in the private insurance market, too. North Dakota first banned private insurance coverage of abortion in 1979. Idaho, Kentucky, and Missouri placed restrictions on private abortion coverage in the 1980s. None has an exception for rape victims.
With the passage of the Affordable Care Act, which establishes state-run private insurance marketplaces, abortion opponents saw a new opportunity to restrict insurance coverage. Twenty three states rushed to ban their new marketplaces from offering any plans that include abortion coverage. And several decided to go even further, passing laws that restrict abortion coverage in the entire private market. Since 2011, Kansas, Nebraska, Oklahoma and Utah have all enacted sweeping restrictions for women purchasing private insurance.
Of the eight states that restricted private insurance coverage for abortion before Michigan joined them, just one — Utah — has included an exception for victims of sexual assault. The remaining seven states don’t have a rape exception. Technically, they all force women to buy “rape insurance.” There just wasn’t the same kind of public outcry surrounding them.
And lawmakers aren’t finished proposing these types of measures, either. Last month, Ohio lawmakers introduced their own version of this type of legislation. That bill doesn’t have a rape exception, either — and actually goes even further to avoid providing any type of options for women who want abortion coverage. Ohio’s bill doesn’t allow women to purchase a separate rider for abortion services.
Michigan’s “rape insurance” likely garnered so much attention because Americans react negatively when abortion restrictions demonstrate callousness toward sexual assault victims. Voters overwhelmingly favor legal abortion access for individuals who have become pregnant from rape. Nonetheless, even outside of measures specifically concerning abortion coverage, most of the new abortion restrictions enacted over the past year did not actually include an exception for rape victims.
And perhaps more broadly, it’s worth remembering that any type of restriction on abortion coverage — even if there is an exception for victims of sexual assault — ultimately prevents some women from getting the care they need. Particularly problematically, the atmosphere surrounding abortion funding has created a confusing situation in which most women don’t understand the full range of options available to them. An estimated 46 percent of insured women end up paying for the full cost of their abortion because they assume their provider must not cover the procedure. An additional 10 percent choose to pay with cash because the pervasive stigma surrounding abortion care has made them too ashamed to use their insurance, and they prefer the additional anonymity.

Julian Teicke, Founder and CEO of FinanceFox, on Building Great User Experiences in Insurance
In this episode, Julian Teicke, Founder and CEO of Seedcamp-backed FinanceFox and I discuss Julian’s background as a serial Founder and what his ambition is, which is to fix the whole user experience within Insurance.
Julian’s starting with building relationships with brokers and slowly moving up the value chain as other elements of the value chain catch up in their innovation as well. The two talk about how startups can work with organizations that are a bit stagnant, but that understand the old world economy. They move on to discuss what a sci-fi insurance future might look like as well.
Julian Teicke is a German-born entrepreneur, best known as Founder and CEO of FinanceFox, an online insurance management platform that facilitates communication between insurance brokers, insurance companies, and customers.
After graduating from the University of St Gallen, he helped in launching the UK division of Chocri and later worked with Groupon in the UK. In 2011, Teicke co-founded E-commerce website DeinDeal, which grew rapidly in Switzerland. He served as the COO of the company till 2015, when the company was sold to Ringier for an undisclosed sum.
In October 2014, Teicke founded EMPAUA, a consultancy partner of Salesforce.com. With offices in Berlin, London, Madrid, Barcelona, and Zurich, the company provides services to start-up companies and businesses. In November 2014, Teicke launched FinanceFox, an online insurance management company as the first incubated company by EMPAUA. Teicke developed the idea of the business with his father who had been in the insurance industry for more than 30 years. The company helps customers in managing their insurance products. Led by Salesforce.com, in 2016 FinanceFox raised $5.5m in investment.

If the above player doesn’t work for you, you can also listen directly from our Soundcloud page.
Listen to similar episodes like this:
Catch up on — Seedcamp Podcast, Episode 85: A Dive into the Future of Insurance
Catch up on — Seedcamp Podcast, Episode 81: A Dive into Bitcoin
Catch up on — Seedcamp Podcast, Episode 73: A Dive into Data Science

Team Hillary and the Insurance Lobby
by Alec MacGillis
Hillary Clinton talks to the press after meeting the Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu on August 1, 2011, in Istanbul, Turkey. (Photo: kisa kuyruk/Shutterstock)
When the former head of the United States government’s health insurance programs was hired in July to run a lobby that had spent tens of millions of dollars trying to derail Obamacare, it was more than just another spin of Washington’s revolving door.
Marilyn Tavenner, former administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, became chief executive of America’s Health Insurance Plans, the industry’s main lobbying group, which is known as AHIP. As the latest of a half-dozen prominent architects and overseers of Obamacare to move into the health industry, her move signified growing ties between health insurers and Democrats despite battles over the Affordable Care Act.
The relationship has long been marked by ambivalence and tension. Tavenner’s predecessor at AHIP, Karen Ignagni, was a former Democratic staffer on Capitol Hill, but the insurance lobby led the way in defeating the Clinton health coverage plan in 1993 and secretly spent about $100 million to attack Obamacare even as it negotiated to make it palatable to the industry. More recently, as the law added millions to the insurance rolls and generated big profits for many companies, they have turned to defending it.
The connections may continue or strengthen if Hillary Clinton wins the Democratic nomination and the presidency. That’s because a Washington firm called the Dewey Square Group, which is closely identified with the Clinton campaign, was at the center of the industry’s efforts to win influence among Democrats — at a time when the two sides were sharply opposed.
As it helps corporations play both sides of the street, Dewey Square stands as a primary example of an ascendant breed in the Washington influence industry: Democratic consulting firms that, over time, have expanded from advising political campaigns into advising industry groups.
With Obamacare, the next occupant of the White House will preside over a continual tweaking of health-care rules and payments that will have more consequence for the insurance industry than ever.
While these firms may do actual lobbying here and there, their main service is what’s known as “grass-tops organizing,” to help corporate clients win over Democratic constituencies. Others in the business, including Glover Park Group and SKDKnickerbocker, also lean Democratic. Their clients generally need less help reaching Republicans.
Among Dewey Square’s clients have been the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, which hired the firm to fight for limits on damages that can be awarded in lawsuits — a longtime plank in the Republican platform — by invoking the plight of Hispanic restaurant owners taken to court; the National Restaurant Association, which paid Dewey Square $772,000 in 2009 as it was fighting legislation that would make it easier for unions to organize workers; and the Private Equity Growth Council, which paid it $188,544 in 2009. And in 2012, Dewey Square was hired by the advocacy campaign Fix the Debt, which pushed an austerity approach to budget deficits.
Dewey Square was founded in Boston in 1993 by Charlie Baker III, a longtime Michael Dukakis hand; Charles Campion, a former aide to Walter Mondale; and Michael Whouley, a legendary master of Election Day turnout tactics. (He is credited with helping Al Gore narrowly beat Bill Bradley in the 2000 New Hampshire primary by sending Gore, with his Secret Service motorcade, into strong Bradley areas on voting day to cause traffic jams.)
The firm was bought by British advertising giant WPP in 2006. It evolved from mostly consulting for candidates to advising other clients — non-profit groups, companies, and industry groups — on how to win political fights.
Among the more than 40 consultants at Dewey Square is Minyon Moore, the director of its multicultural and state and local practice, a former political aide in Bill Clinton’s White House who joined the firm in 2004. Moore is close with Hillary Clinton — in 2008, she asked a Washington businessman to fund a shadow pro-Clinton effort during the Democratic primaries in four states and Puerto Rico costing $608,750. Moore weathered that revelation, and it was she who organized the first meeting at Clinton’s Embassy Row home in 2013 to discuss what another run for president would entail.
Moore, Baker, and Whouley were in the so-called working group that oversaw the Clinton campaign-in-waiting before her formal announcement. And Baker was hired as the campaign’s “chief administrative officer” — essentially, its liaison to the Democratic National Committee. If Clinton wins the nomination, Baker is expected to assume control of the party structure in 2016. Further affirming Dewey Square’s influence in Hillary-land is its alum Guy Cecil, who leads the main pro-Clinton super PAC, Priorities USA.
None of the firm’s known projects was as directly opposed to the Democrats’ core agenda as its work on behalf of AHIP in 2007 and 2008.
When Democrats took control of Congress after their 2006 election sweep — a sweep in which Whouley played a key role in boosting turnout — one of their first agenda items was to expand health insurance for low-income children. To pay for it, they proposed reining in subsidies given to insurers who offered seniors coverage under Medicare Advantage, the privately run alternative to Medicare.
Medicare Advantage was created on the logic that it would increase choice and provide more efficient care. But by 2007, the plans were costing the government about $1,000 more per enrollee than traditional Medicare. Congressional budget analysts found that if the government cut payments to insurers to match those in the traditional system it could save $54 billion over five years.
That would be bad news for AHIP’s members, who were relying on Medicare Advantage for an increasing share of their profits. The insurance lobby, then led by Ignagni, turned to Dewey Square.
The firm already had offered AHIP its services as a conduit to Democratic lawmakers and activists, in particular African-American and Hispanic ones, according to a person involved in the discussions. The two came up with a shrewd argument against cuts to Medicare Advantage: Minorities were especially prone to chronic conditions such as diabetes and high blood pressure. Since Medicare Advantage plans purported to be superior at managing those problems, the subsidy cuts, and resulting benefit cuts, would hit minorities especially hard. (In fact, enrollment levels were no higher among minorities than white retirees.)
It was an all-out effort, as described by the Wall Street Journal in 2007. Dewey Square held a briefing for black and Latino lawmakers, with the invitations sent out by a Dewey Square principal who used to be executive director of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus. There, the lawmakers heard a pitch for Medicare Advantage from Aetna CEO Ronald Williams, who is African American.
The message seemed to register with several Democratic House members, including Stephanie Tubbs-Jones, from Cleveland, who spoke up against the cuts at a House hearing, saying, “It’s a program where a significant number of minority seniors have decided to place themselves.” (Among the black lawmakers who weren’t persuaded was Senator Barack Obama.)
AHIP unveiled an advisory committee on the issue that included three dozen black, Latino, and Asian-American leaders, including the former mayors of Denver and Miami. Dewey Square coaxed letters to Congress opposing the Medicare Advantage cuts out of the NAACP and the League of United Latin American Citizens.
The firm even flew in from Orlando an 81-year-old Hispanic woman in a wheelchair who had had five heart attacks and three strokes to testify against the cuts, saying that her Medicare Advantage plan paid for a foot doctor to come to her house to clip her toenails to avoid diabetes complications. “It was a creative way to look at the issue that I don’t think had been examined before — and it did catch folks’ attention on the Hill,” said Dan Elling, who was a Republican health-policy staffer on the House Ways and Means Committee at the time.
Congressional Democrats ended up implementing some cuts to Medicare Advantage in 2008, over President Bush’s veto. But the fight arose again the next year, with higher stakes, when Obama and congressional Democrats launched their push for the Affordable Care Act, which called for additional cuts to Medicare Advantage to help pay for near-universal health coverage.
This time, AHIP’s campaign included getting seniors to send letters to their local newspapers opposing the cuts — a tactic that backfired when an editor at the Lawrence Eagle-Tribune, in Massachusetts, discovered that some of the people whose names were attached to the letters had no recollection of writing them. He got even more suspicious when he found that a young man who had called to make sure the letters were published was an intern at the Dewey Square Group.
The AHIP campaign didn’t keep Congress from including more Medicare Advantage cuts in the final legislation. “I knew they were out hustling lobbyists to work the crowd, as it were, but it didn’t seem to make any difference to us,” said Pete Stark, a California Democrat who chaired the health subcommittee on Ways and Means prior to losing his seat in 2012.
But AHIP did ultimately win important concessions. The industry limited the impact of cuts by getting the Obama administration to expand a demonstration project rewarding high-quality insurers with higher payments.
With insurers under less pressure to raise the plans’ costs to enrollees or reduce their benefits, the big exodus from Medicare Advantage that AHIP had warned about never happened. In fact, enrollment has surged to nearly 17 million beneficiaries, more than a third of all Medicare enrollees.
Ginny Terzano, a spokeswoman for Dewey Square, said it stopped working with AHIP in 2008.
“The firm tends to work with businesses and organizations that are like-minded in our policy views and values,” she said. “If it becomes clear that a policy position is not in line with our thinking, we either won’t take the work or we will step away from the work.”
She declined to comment on how the firm’s work for AHIP reflects on Clinton given the firm’s prominence in her campaign: “If you’re looking at the Clinton campaign and what they think, I refer you to the Clinton campaign.”
A Clinton campaign spokesman did not respond to a request for comment.
With Obamacare, the next occupant of the White House will preside over a continual tweaking of health-care rules and payments that will have more consequence for the insurance industry than ever. Congress and the next administration will also be facing the big decision of whether to retain an excise tax on high-cost insurance plans, which is supposed to go into effect in 2017. AHIP is already lobbying to repeal it.
Richard Kirsch, the former director of Health Care for America Now, which lobbied for universal coverage, said he isn’t kept awake nights by Dewey Square’s connections to the insurance lobby. Just because the firm was doing the industry’s bidding when it was being paid doesn’t mean its principals would take up the industry’s cause if they ended up in a Hillary Clinton administration, he said.
Kirsch said he and other policy advocates are more worried about Obama officials like Tavenner, the former Medicare and Medicaid chief, who have moved into the industry.
Clare Krusing, a spokeswoman for the insurance lobby, said the hiring of an Obama official as chief executive doesn’t reflect a change in the group’s strategy. “This isn’t a shift or an evolution,” she said. “How you move forward in a way that creates and delivers affordable choice for consumers has always been our focus.”
To Kirsch, though, Tavenner’s connections raise the prospect of unfair influence even though government ethics rules forbid her from directly lobbying the administration over the next two years.
“It’s a huge conflict and a great example of revolving door,” Kirsch said.
This post originally appeared on ProPublica as “Insurance Lobby That Fought Hillarycare and Obamacare Now Has Sturdy Bridges to Democrats” and is re-published here under a Creative Commons license.

What to Do If You Can’t Afford Health Insurance — The Bold Italic — San Francisco

By Suzanne Barnecut
Wherever you fall in the debate over health-care reform, it’s a thing that’s happening. And soon. In case you missed it, Peter Lawrence Kane recently wrote about what every young San Franciscan should know about Obamacare.
If you already have health insurance, either privately or through a corporate benefits plan, you don’t need to sweat the Affordable Care Act deadlines. Many San Franciscans, however, will be impacted, because San Francisco, like any metropolitan area, is home to a great lot of artists — musicians, writers, painters, photographers, performers, and so on — as well as large numbers of inspired and hardworking individuals in the retail, restaurant, and hospitality industries. Many are cobbling together a living from multiple part-time shifts or are taking on freelance work or projects that have unpredictable time frames, leaving them without steady, reliable income. Considering the steep local inflation San Francisco has seen over the past few years, the prospect of paying for health insurance is as daunting as it ever has been. Not to mention that many of the currently uninsured are also undocumented immigrants, whom the health reform does not include.
If any of this describes you, we aim to help. If you cannot afford health insurance and are willing (or must) pay the tax penalty, or if you’re looking for something outside a traditional HMO or PPO, here are a few options for seeking medical treatment and advice.


Healthy San Francisco (also known as Healthy SF) is not going away once Obamacare goes into effect. It’s important to note, however, that current participants who become eligible for the expanded Medi-Cal program or financial assistance through Covered California will no longer be eligible for Healthy SF.

No. Healthy SF is a San Francisco–specific “health access program” through which participants may pay modest fees for treatments or access a reimbursement fund set up through their employer. Healthy SF is open to all city residents regardless of immigration status, employment status, or preexisting medical conditions, provided you meet the eligibility requirements.

Some Healthy SF participants may pay a Quarterly Participant fee and a Point-of-Service fee based on their income level. See the sliding-scale fee schedule here.

✓ Primary & preventative care
✓ Urgent & emergency care
✓ Mental health services
✓ Alcohol & drug treatment
✓ Lab services
✓ Pharmacy
✓ Ambulance & hospital care
✓ Family planning
✓ Medical equipment
✓ Specialty care

Healthy SF matches participants with a Medical Home, which are participating clinics (through the San Francisco Department of Public Health or the San Francisco Community Clinic Consortium) or a San Francisco campus of an organization such as Kaiser Permanente. While there are many possible medical homes, participants typically visit a single site.


Perhaps you’ve received marketing materials for One Medical via snail mail. I know I have, but because it always seemed like some mysterious medical place that wasn’t where I was insured, I never paid attention. The truth is, they’re kind of intriguing. One Medical is intended for individuals both with and without health insurance. They’re a little more tech savvy than city-based free clinics, offering same-day appointments that are scheduled online and in large-enough blocks of time so that you’re guaranteed a by-the-clock experience, with most follow-ups handled online. But despite their glamour, membership is open to anyone willing to pay the fees.

No. One Medical can be viewed as either an add-on or an alternative to health insurance. An annual membership fee allows members to access care at flat rates and either apply their health insurance or pay out of pocket. A bonus is that One Medical offers traditional primary care in addition to integrative medicine that typically isn’t covered by insurance.

Members pay $149 annually. Costs after that are based on the fee schedule. Uninsured members will pay $150 for their first doctor visit and $100 for each subsequent visit, for example. Insured members may choose to pay fees out of pocket or apply their insurance and pay only their standard co-pays and deductibles.

✓ Primary & preventative care
✓ Integrative medicine
✓ Lab services
✓ Women’s health
✓ Traveler’s health

One Medical is a national organization, but there are 11 locations in San Francisco as well as six others around the Bay Area. They boast same-day, on-time appointments and as much online service as possible in order to provide easy access for working professionals.


The San Francisco Department of Public Health offers a network of primary-care clinics, affiliated partners, and fee-for-service clinics around the city. Click here for a directory of clinics or health centers, and for information about clinic hours and drop-in care or to schedule an appointment.

No. These are free clinics and community-based health clinics meant to serve the underserved of San Francisco.

Mostly free, although some specialty clinics offer services for a modest fee.

✓ Primary & preventative care
✓ Urgent, acute, & emergency care
✓ Specialty care
✓ Home care
✓ Dental services
✓ Youth services
✓ Breast & cervical-cancer services
✓ Transgender services
✓ Housing & urban-health services
✓ Women’s health
✓ Immunization & travel services

Each primary-care clinic operates individually, and several are located at San Francisco General Hospital. Here’s a list: Castro-Mission Health Center, Children’s Health Center at SFGH, Chinatown Public Health Center, Curry Senior Center, Family Health Center at SFGH, General Medical Clinic at SFGH, Maxine Hall Health Center, Ocean Park Health Center, Potrero Hill Health Center, Silver Avenue Family Health Center, Southeast Health Center, and STD Clinic on 7th Street station (PEP).


The SFCCC is a nonprofit organization comprised of community-based partner clinics created for underserved neighborhoods and for low-income, uninsured, or homeless individuals to receive medical treatment. Click here for a directory of clinics and for instructions on hours for drop-in care or to schedule an appointment.

No. These are free or low-cost clinics intended for those who cannot afford to pay much or at all.

Services are free for those who cannot pay, and they are offered on a sliding scale for those who are able to.

✓ Primary & preventative care
✓ Urgent & emergency care
✓ Mental health services
✓ Health promotion & disease-prevention education
✓ Dental services

Each partner clinic operates as a stand-alone clinic. Rather than specialize, most of the clinics offer “one-stop shopping” and service in multiple languages. Clinics include the following: Glide Health Services,HealthRIGHT 360, Lyon-Martin Health Services, Mission Neighborhood Health Center, Native American Health Center, North East Medical Services, Saint Anthony Free Medical Clinic, San Francisco Free Clinic, South of Market Health Center, Street Outreach Services and Women’s Community Clinic.
The consortium website clearly lists the mission, target population, services, and programs for each clinic.


MusiCares provides a safety net for uninsured musicians in times of need, including help with financial, medical, and personal emergencies.

No. This is a grant-based program in which qualifying musicians (uninsured and without means to pay for coverage, and able to document at least five years of employment in the music industry or credits on six commercially released tracks) can apply for assistance for specific (and confidential) issues.

Free

✓ Primary care
✓ Specialty care
✓ Emergency care
✓ Addiction resources
✓ Dental services
✓ Other: basic living needs, equipment replacement, funeral/burial assistance, psychotherapy, etc.

Medical-network providers are located in the eastern, southern and western United States. Providers donate their time and expertise to provide services that range from general medical and dental to audiology, surgery, physical therapy, optometry, and so on at specific locations. All appointments must be made through MusiCares.


HINT stands for the Health Insurance Navigation Tool, which provides free support and advice to musicians who need information about health insurance.

No. This is an advice service for musicians provided by health-insurance experts who are also musicians. The aim is to provide information and to relieve confusion.

Thirty-minute appointments (by phone) are free and confidential.

✓ Information
✓ Advice

Musicians anywhere nationwide can request an appointment online. At the time of this article, calls are scheduled on Monday evenings, Eastern Standard Time.


The AHIRC helps connect artists, craftspeople, and entertainment-industry workers around the country to affordable health insurance, including alternative routes to coverage as well as local resources for care for small businesses, performers, visual artists, stagehands, filmmakers, musicians, artisans, and other self-employed and episodic workers.

No. This is an outreach and advocacy service that aims to provide access to help, and to help various artists make informed decisions.

Free

✓ Information & resources
✓ Individual consultations
✓ Education — seminars and tutorials
✓ Community outreach
✓ Advocacy

There are offices in New York and Los Angeles, but consultations are also handled by phone and email.


Family PACT is a program aimed specifically at family planning. It helps eligible Californians prevent pregnancy when they are not ready for it.

No. This is a limited-benefits program open to California residents (low-income men, women, and teens) who meet the eligibility requirements. Oftentimes, other sources of health coverage do not include family planning or pregnancy.

All services are covered during the valid enrollment period. Enrollment is good for one year and can be renewed.

✓ Birth control
✓ Emergency contraceptive pills
✓ Prevention, screening, and treatment for STDs
✓ HIV testing & counseling
✓ Limited cervical-cancer screening

Care is provided by a wide variety of providers. Search by ZIP code here for a list of providers near you (many of which are SFCCC partner clinics).


Not to worry, Planned Parenthood, the leading sexual and reproductive health-care provider and advocate — through which many uninsured women have been receiving routine exams and birth control — is not going away. The organization will continue to serve women (and men) who are both insured and uninsured.

No.

Health insurance is applied wherever possible, but Planned Parenthood will continue to provide free or low-cost services to the uninsured.

✓ General health care
✓ Women’s health
✓ Men’s sexual health
✓ Birth control
✓ Pregnancy & infertility
✓ Abortion
✓ Emergency contraceptive pills
✓ Prevention, screening, and treatment for STDs
✓ Help with body image issues
✓ Help with sexual orientation and gender questions

Planned Parenthood locations include the San Francisco Health Center at 1650 Valencia Street or the Wohlford Family Clinic at the Good Samaritan Family Resource Center at 1294 Potrero Avenue.
Health insurance is applied wherever possible, but Planned Parenthood will continue to provide free or low-cost services to the uninsured.


RotaCare offers free clinics for the uninsured in the greater Bay Area. The organization is largely volunteer driven and is supported completely by grants and donations.

No.

Free, including medical exams, diagnostic testing, lab testing, and most pharmaceuticals.

It’s really important to note that services vary by location, so be sure to carefully read the website for information about clinics near you to determine whether they will be able to accommodate your needs.

Clinics are located in Concord, Daly City, Gilroy, Half Moon Bay, Monterey, Mountain View , Pittsburg ,San Jose, San Leandro, San Rafael, and Santa Cruz, are open one to three evenings per week. Due to high demand, clinics sometimes take patients using a lottery system or on a first-come-first-serve basis until they’re full. Many of the clinics have to turn away patients each week.


There are a number of dentistry schools in San Francisco that offer clinics open to the public at reduced rates. Dental work is performed by students under the supervision of resident or faculty dentists.

No.

Fees are based on the service performed. The clinics also accept dental insurance.

Services vary by location, so be sure to carefully read the website for information about clinics near you to determine whether they will be able to accommodate your needs. In general, there are clinics for the following:
✓ General dental services
✓ Oral surgery
✓ Endodontics (root canals)
✓ Orthodontics
✓ Pediatric dental services
✓ Periodontics (gums)
✓ Prosthodontics (dentures)

Check out the UCSF School of Dentistry, which operates a variety of clinics. Another option is the University of the Pacific Arthur A. Dugoni School of Dentistry. Clinics for both schools are located in San Francisco.


Adventures in Tooth Care Adventurous/Terrible/Expensive, Even With Insurance
by Sarah Sluis

One look at all the white spots on my x-rays, and it’s clear I am the kind of patient who makes dentists lots of money. I have had tens of thousands of dollars in my mouth — fillings, crowns, root canals, dental surgery, and much of it has come from my pocket. I am lucky enough to have dental insurance, but it’s not a pay-all, cure-all.
Last year I had my first experience with double treatment. A few days after getting a chipped filling replaced ($36.40 out-of-pocket, $145.60 out of the $1,500 coverage I had for the year), it started to hurt. I was biking home, and the wind sent lightning strikes of pain up through my gums. I pulled air through my tooth, checking to see if it triggered the pain. Yep.
My emergency appointment with my dentist where he did the cold test, cost me nothing. This is the cold test: He puts something cold on your good tooth, and it feels cold. And then he puts the cold probe on the sick tooth, and suddenly you have the absolute worst nervy pain radiating all the way up through your nose. Then your stomach feels sick because you know you have a damaged tooth, and thousands of dollars of work in front of you. The fact that I had just had a filling redone on the same tooth was just “bad timing.”
I went straight to the endodontist, or root canal specialist. Despite my experience with tooth pain, I have low pain tolerance, and I want it to go away immediately. The endodontist told me that sometimes people split up their treatment over two calendar years — root canal one year, crown the next. Because the tooth was farther back in the mouth, I would also need a crown (estimated $1,000). I decided to get the root canal ($2,390 billed, $1,326 contracted amount. Cigna paid $506 of that, I owed $779.60. Although the procedure was covered at 80%, I had already maxed out the annual coverage) and the required “post & core” treatment ($264, Cigna’s contracted rate but no insurance left) in 2012, and then delay getting the crown until 2013. It would save me at least $500, since crowns are generally covered at 50%. Plus, I could put money in a flexible spending account, giving me a further tax-free discount of about 30%, bringing my savings up to about 70%, or $700 off the total cost. It was a great idea, do it! It just didn’t quite work for me.
Our company announced they were changing insurers for next year, throwing my plan into disarray. Reimbursement rates were lower for out-of-network dentists — and required a $150 deductible. And I couldn’t wait that long. I got the crown, but my anticipated savings of $700 went down to around $400 — and it could eventually be less if I still owe money after the claim is settled. So I waited a couple of months to finish dental treatment for what ended up being maybe $400 in savings.
Although that amount is still a pretty sizeable chunk of my paycheck, it came at a high emotional toll. Now that my crown is in place ($633), the pain in the rest of my mouth has diminished, but I’m still in fear that more of my teeth will fail. The pain in that one tooth cost me $2,000, and I have 27 more teeth. My next cleaning and x-rays are in a month, and I might need a therapy session if my dentist finds a cavity. My mouth is a ticking time bomb. Every time you put a filling in a tooth, it weakens it, making it more likely that a tooth will require root canal treatment — or worse — in the future. Fillings have a lifespan of a decade, meaning my teeth will always require expensive maintenance. I’ve already crossed the line from being a compliant patient to a compulsively neurotic one. He better at least tell me my gums look good from all that flossing (I’m an Oral-B Glide girl, $3.80).
Sarah Sluis has a great/expensive smile.

I think in some cases new players in insurance can reduce claims by changing behaviour of the insureds (as Oscar aims to in health and telematics insurers do in auto). So part of that pie is available. But otherwise I agree, common fallacy to look at overall market instead of addressable market


The Weird Future and Weirder History of Life Insurance
When we think of “innovative financial products,” we probably think of credit-default swaps, collateralized debt obligations, and other ghoulish abstractions that we nervously half-remember from that last Michael Lewis book we read. We probably don’t think of life insurance. But a fascinating new article in the New York Times Magazine gives a very informative tour through the “life-settlements business:” an emerging marketplace whereby people who need cash near what is ostensibly the end of their life sell their life insurance policies to a third party for a price.
Here’s how it works: once a person decides to sell his/her life insurance policy, the third-party investor does a bunch of research, usually based on the the seller’s medical records, to see how long the person is likely to live. (This is important, as the third party investor is on the hook to pay the sick/dying person’s life insurance premiums until their death.) Then the seller and the investor agree on a price. Say we’re talking about a $500,000 life insurance policy, and a person with a two-year life expectancy; the investor might offer $300,000, in hopes that the difference will both cover the cost of paying premiums for the rest of the seller’s life and leave room for profit.
As ghoulish as this sounds, the article’s writer, James Vlahos, makes the case that this is in fact a pro-consumer innovation in the life insurance marketplace. He may be right; I’m not sure. But what many commenters to the article really find ghoulish is the simple fact that we have such an eroded public safety net that folks are reduced to selling their life insurance policies for the sake of paying their medical bills and the other costs associated with old age. In an era of small social security payments, high medical costs, and a failed system of retirement savings, our once-proud system to prevent poverty in old age is reeling.
And indeed, what the life-settlements business really does is offer a way to convert “death insurance” into “old-age insurance” — which was, sure enough, an important private market back in the bad old days before social security.
In fact, there was one product back in the 19th and early 20th century that combined death insurance (probably a more apt term than life insurance, eh?) with old age insurance in one package. It was called the tontine; basically, a bunch of people would pay their life insurance premiums into a big pool, and that pool of money would pay dividends back to all of its members. As people died and fell out of the pool, their families got a life insurance payment, but the number of beneficiaries drawing from the pool shrank — and the dividends to each remaining member increased. As you aged, you got higher dividends. But there was a hitch: in many tontines, if you missed a single payment, you would fall out of the pool, and your equity would be divided among those who remained. Thus, to put it most dramatically, the old goat who outlived every other member of the pool would get the fattest dividends, and his family would get the biggest life insurance payout.
The tontine was outlawed in the early 20th Century, but variousscholars have called for some modified version of its return.
What can we draw from all this? That our social insurance safety net is in trouble: yes. That financial innovation in life insurance has a very long and weird history: absolutely.

At COP21, a Frantic Debate Over Climate Aid, and Some Hopeful News About Climate Insurance
by Ted Scheinman
Protestors from the world’s most vulnerable countries on Friday in Paris. (Photo: Ted Scheinman/Pacific Standard)
Reporters and delegates arriving at le Bourget for COP21 this morning discovered bodies on the ground. Activists had staged a die-in, lying in various postures of defeat and moving only to participate in the chants:
“What do we want?” “Loss and damage!” “When do we want it?” “Now!”
“One point five degrees! One point five degrees!”
“Climate justice!” “Climate justice now!”
The protest was organized by Act Now for Climate Justice, and comes at a moment when the debate over “loss and damages” has imperiled basic negotiations over finance.
“The brute reality of the talks have set in,” says Kelly Dent, who heads Oxfam’s team on economic justice. “It’s getting political, and lives are on the line.”
“We don’t want to hear ‘compensation’ — it’s reparations. Reparations for climate debt. Loss and damage has to be anchored in the Paris agreement, and it has to be operable as soon as possible.”
According to Dent, last night’s adaptation sessions were “a bit of a bust-up,” with rich countries remaining cagey about economic commitments, and delegations from the United States, Canada, Japan, and others insisting that we broaden the pool of contributing countries — essentially asking poorer countries to send aid to each other, a tactic that some observers say is part of a larger campaign to strip the Paris agreement of any hard terms on finance — or questions of historic liability.
Those questions lie at the heart of the debate over loss and damages: To acknowledge a climate “debt” in an official United Nations agreement could leave wealthier countries answerable for liability claims of massive proportions. (Politico has estimated that, under such an arrangement, developed countries might be answerable for “hundreds of billions of dollars for the role their industrialization played in global warming.”) And while Obama pledged on Monday to “embrace our responsibility and to do something about [climate change],” negotiators from wealthier developed countries — including the U.S. — have been slow to embrace that responsibility, or even accept it.
“We don’t want to hear ‘compensation,’” Prerna Bomzan of LDC Watch has said. “It’s reparations: reparations for climate debt. Loss and damage has to be anchored in the Paris agreement, and it has to be operable as soon as possible.”
Brandon Wu, a senior policy analyst at ActionAid USA, had withering remarks this morning about his country’s negotiators: “They’re trying to hide loss and damage in a way that would be underhanded if it weren’t so familiar. One of the major tactics is to force a conversation about expanding the pool of contributors.”
At-risk countries had been lobbying for a more ambitious climate target (1.5 degrees over pre-industrial levels, rather than two), a bid that fell through last night when Arab states, led by Saudi Arabia, blocked any discussion of enhanced emissions targets. Meanwhile, at various of the spin-off groups, some negotiators from the G77 group staged walk-outs last night, having grown impatient with Western intransigence on finance, and especially on loss and damage.
Asad Rehman, senior campaigner for Friends of the Earth and an old hand at U.N. climate summits, says these walk-outs are disheartening but not surprising. “[G77 negotiators] are saying that developed countries have been negotiating in bad faith and are deliberately excluding all of the issues that developing countries are concerned about,” Rehman says. “I think there’s a palpable anger amongst developing country negotiators — real anger and frustration.”
Today, though, there is progress, of a very modest sort. Where yesterday, Western powers were pushing for a “no-text” option on loss and damages (i.e., the option to remove loss and damages wholesale from the final draft), today they’re showing greater willingness to discuss certain details of finance, including funds for loss and damage, mitigation, and adaptation. Laurent Fabius, the French foreign minister and president of this year’s climate summit, will demand a working draft at noon tomorrow, at which point he will review it with top-level ministers from over 100 countries. (Secretary of State John Kerry returns to Paris on Monday, according to his press office.)
It is possible that climate insurance could help ease the burden on the world’s most vulnerable populations while setting Western minds at ease about how much money they’ll need to contribute. The Munich Climate Insurance Initiative made a persuasive case today for the promise of the G7 InsuResilience project, which German Chancellor Angela Merkel announced at the G7 summit this June. Right now, around 100 million people in developing countries are insured against climate risks; InsuResilience aims to raise that number to 500 million. Peter Hoeppe, MCII’s chairman, noted today that two-thirds of all weather-related fatalities have occurred in the lowest-income countries. (MCII draws its data from Munich Re — the source of yesterday’s climate risk index, and the world’s most comprehensive database on natural disasters.)
“Right now, in most developing countries, there is no insurance market where people could cover at least part of the risk,” Hoeppe says. “With InsuResilience, after an extreme event, those affected get a payout so they can buy seeds again.”
Insurance penetration worldwide in 2012. The map looks very similar today, but could look very different by 2020. (Source: Munich Re/MCII)
The InsuResilience project has been engaging countries both individually and in groups — the Caribbean’s Catastrophic Risk Facility and the African Risk Capacity are two such “pools” — and seeks to develop early-warning systems for those countries, plus mobile updates on everything from risky weather to insurance pay-outs. There’s reasonable concern about whether current disbursements at the national level are getting to the right people, but InsuResilience can, in many cases, provide direct insurance, and their aim is to do more of it; already, in certain parts of the Caribbean, Hoeppe says, “insured people get a [mobile] notification within 24 hours whether there will be a payout, and they get the money at latest 14 days later on their account.” MCII aims to provide individual insurance to 100 million vulnerable citizens by 2020.
Christoph Bals, MCII’s vice chair, says that international climate risk insurance can help untangle thorny questions that have been “oversimplified in the loss and damage debate.” Equally important: Aid in the form of insurance could well prove an easier sell among wealthy nations, who remain leery of donating lump sums to the Green Climate Fund and other such instruments of aid.
“It’s appealing to donor countries because of the incentives to reduce risks,” Bals says. “And it is very transparent what risks are covered. Also, the cost is transparent and can be limited. But: It’s no instrument to replace adaptation; rather, to complement it.”
“Climate insurance is also a tool that shows we can bring positive solutions, and not just say no all the time,” Bals says.
We’ll see how things go tonight. The negotiators’ final evening with this draft will hardly be a relaxed affair, but hints and whispers about finance developments this afternoon offer a bit of hope. It remains possible that a loss and damage deal might appear in the final binding agreement, but the consensus in Paris says it’s more likely to be included in the appended, non-binding “decision.” That would be a shame, and would leave a major hole in the safety net — one that no international insurance initiative, no matter how robust, can singlehandedly repair.
“We do not foresee an outcome in Paris without loss and damage,” Pa Ousman Jarju, chair of the Least Developed Countries group of 48 nations, told reporters on Thursday. “That is a red line for us.”

“Catastrophic Consequences of Climate Change” is Pacific Standard’s year-long investigation into the devastating effects of climate change — and how scholars, legislators, and citizen-activists can help stave off its most dire consequences.

Hannity Blasts Insurance Coverage For Birth Control, Defends Viagra: ‘That Is A Medical Problem!’
By Alex Seitz-Wald
Piling on to the conservative apoplexia over the Obama administration’s recent ruling that insurance companies should cover birth control without co-pays, Fox News host Sean Hannity slammed the policy last night for encouraging “screwing around,” but defended coverage of Viagra. Taking a bold stance again reason, Hannity said, “I don’t care about the scientists” who recommended the move and insisted that the birth control is “not a women’s health issue.” Asked how he felt about insurance companies covering male enhancement medication, Hannity strongly defended the practice, saying, “That is a medical problem!” Watch excerpts from the segment:

Hannity may be surprised to know that the overwhelming majority of policies — particularly employer policies and the federal government’s health care — already cover birth control. Meanwhile, at least 27 states already require insurers to cover birth control. More than 99 percent of all women ages 15 to 44 who have ever had sexual intercourse have used at least one contraceptive method. Overall, 62 percent of the 62 million women ages 15 to 44 are currently using a method of contraception.

Debunking The Latest Obamacare Myth: The ‘Insurance Company Bailout’
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
By Sy Mukherjee
On Monday, Sen. Marco Rubio (R-FL) wrote a FoxNews.com op-ed tantalizingly titled, “Sebelius, Congress should take ObamaCare bailout off the table.” The piece’s central premise is that Obamacare could force taxpayers to pay for an “insurance company bailout” in case the health law’s open enrollment period goes horribly awry, and that Congress should pass a one-page bill proposed by Rubio making sure that Americans won’t be subjected to this kind of government overreach.
But that belies the actual purpose and structure of the Obamacare mechanisms that Rubio is casting as bogeymen. They’re not “bailouts” at all. In fact, they’re mostly temporary measures and consumer protections that were crafted as important backstops for the health law’s potentially rickety first three years, and they already exist for other government programs (including the Republican-proposed Medicare Part D prescription drug benefit). And if Rubio succeeds in repealing them, insurance companies won’t be the only ones that suffer — potentially millions of Americans could see their monthly insurance premiums skyrocket.
Insurance companies were sort of shooting in the dark when they set premiums for Obamacare’s first year. They had to approximate how many people would enroll, how old the customers would be, how sick they would be, how much insurers would have to pay out in claims — but the whole enterprise was, ultimately, a series of educated guesses.
That’s not surprising considering that Obamacare’s marketplaces represent the first time the American insurance industry has to compete in unified, regulated markets without discriminating against sick people or offering a junk product. But it does mean that there will be a fair amount of uncertainty in the health law’s early years.
Enter reinsurance, risk-adjustment, and risk corridors — a trio of financial shock absorbers sometimes referred to collectively as “The Three Rs.” Two out of the three Rs — reinsurance and risk corridors — are temporary programs, while risk-adjustment is a permanent Obamacare provision that will stabilize insurance pools from year-to-year. So what do they actually do?
Reinsurance is basically insurance for insurance companies. In 2014, the ACA sets aside about $10 billion that will be used to help insurers pay out claims for particularly expensive patients enrolled in marketplace plans, thereby also keeping down these policies’ premiums. This reinsurance money is funded through a nominal $63 tax on almost all American insurance plans. It will also be phased out over the next three years, providing $6 billion for insurers in 2015, $4 billion in 2016, and nothing afterwards.
Risk-adjustment is what Bloomberg BusinessWeek’s John Tozzi aptly described as “Robin Hood-style redistribution” from health insurers who had to pay out less in medical claims in a given year to those who had to pay out more. The entirety of this transfer occurs between the insurance companies themselves and is a clever way of discouraging insurers from cherry-picking young, healthy, and cheaper-to-cover customers. For instance, if a marketplace plan enrolls a disproportionate number of young people and therefore has to pay out less in claims, they’ll end up losing money to insurers that tried to attract a more diverse risk pool.
Finally, risk corridors are another temporary program meant to prevent premiums from skyrocketing during Obamacare’s nascent years. Under this provision, the federal government will give insurers who set their premiums too low — i.e., those who low-balled how much they’d have to pay out in claims — a portion of the profits from insurers who set their premiums too high. The level of the cut that the federal government will take from plans with excessive rates, and the level it will pay out to those that lost money, both depend on how off-base the insurers’ set premiums were.
Like risk-adjustment, risk corridor adjustments take place entirely between insurers in marketplaces and the federal government. The only involvement that the taxpayer has is as a beneficiary to a consumer protection. For instance, the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF) estimates that these various backstop measures will limit premium increases to below 2.4 percent even if young, healthy enrollment in the marketplaces is 50 percent lower than expected.
Rubio’s loaded language portending an “insurance company bailout” may be good politics. But in reality, repealing these measures would only hurt the very people he’s claiming to protect from government overreach.


The Effects of the Aluminum F150 on Insurance Rates
The 2015 Ford F150 introduced the first reinforced aluminum body a pickup truck has ever had. Unfortunately, the aluminum body, tested in Utah and Nevada mines, is harder to repair than steel.
Because of that many people were worried about the increased costs of repair and how that may impact the insurance rates.
Travis Langness, from popular car website Edmunds.com, immediately conducted a test to see how much more expensive it would be to repair the new Ford F150. The results showed that it requires more time and the labor rates are more expensive making it more expensive overall to fix.
This is what makes people think that insurance costs will rise, but do they?
How Does Insurance Work?
Car and Driver reported calling Allstate Insurance Company to see if prices would change, but Allstate did not know what the impact would be just yet.
Then, Car and Driver called Dr. Robert Hartwig, the President and Economist at the Insurance Information Institute.
Most driver’s insurance premiums go to liability coverage and a smaller amount goes to collision repair, according to Hartwig. Because of this, Hartwig said that repairs costs have a minimum effect on insurance premiums.
This means that insurance costs for the Ford F150 would only increase slightly, but not immediately since insurance companies need to collect data to analyze the impact of the new aluminum body repairs costs.
It’s More Expensive, but Not in Insurance
The new Ford F150 is more expensive than its predecessors in replacement parts and repairs, but insurance costs will be around the same whether you live in Utah or elsewhere in the country.
The higher prices for repairs and parts are normal because newer prices are always higher for all new technological implementations.
With time, prices will regulate like they have for other technologies and the benefits of the high-strength aluminum alloy will be the only remaining thing. At least, until a new technology comes around and then the cycle begins again.
Esteban De Hoyos is an automotive writer. Information provided by Henry Day Ford. He writes for Fusion 360, an advertising agency in Utah.

Harvard Professors Complain About Changes To Their Very Generous Health Insurance
Harvard University CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
Professors at Harvard University are unhappy about changes to their health insurance benefits that will require them to pay more for their plans, according to a story published in the New York Times that has quickly spread across right-wing outlets.
Particularly since many of the health policy experts at Harvard helped craft the Affordable Care Act, conservative writers have been quick to point out the irony: Ivy League elites are now unhappy with some of the changes under the very law that they championed several years ago.
But, as multiple health policy writers have pointed out, the changes coming to Harvard actually represent the implementation of some of the more conservative policies in the health law that are intended to reduce health costs over the long term.
Harvard University is requiring faculty to pay more out of their own pockets for deductibles and co-pays. Essentially, when they interact with the health care system, they’ll pay a little bit more than they used to — 10 percent of the total charges until they reach the out-of-pocket limit of $1,500 for an individual and $4,500 for a family. Meanwhile, their annual deductibles are rising to $250 and $750, respectively.
According to the New York Times, the chairman of the university benefits committee acknowledged that employees will now pay more than they’re used to for health services. But he also said that’s the point, at least in part, “because patient cost-sharing is proven to reduce overall spending.”
That refers to the traditionally conservative notion of “skin in the game” — in other words, the theory that requiring enrollees to pay for their interactions with the health sector will cut down on unnecessary doctor’s visits, tests, and procedures. This is what has driven the rise of high-deductible policies that offer low premiums but that require enrollees to pay more when they actually use their plans. Obamacare opponents typically argue that the law doesn’t do enough to encourage this kind of cost reduction strategy.
One way the Affordable Care Act does pursue this goal is by penalizing companies that offer overly generous benefits to their workers, under the assumption that those plans lead to excessive tests and services, ultimately driving up the cost of care. The law’s so-called “Cadillac tax,” which will level an excise tax on high-value plans beginning in 2018, is one of the reasons that Harvard says it decided to restructure its benefits. That tax remains somewhat controversial because — as illustrated by the outraged Harvard professors — reducing benefits is never a popular move among beneficiaries.
“Indeed, Harvard’s reforms show that in some ways, Obamacare has pushed the health-care system moderately in the direction conservatives favor, by encouraging employers to shift more of the cost of care onto employees,” Jonathan Chait argues in New York Magazine.
Even aside from Obamacare specifically, the dynamics at Harvard University are simply reflective of a larger trend in the health care sector, as costs have been rising and employers have been looking for ways to cut back on benefits to save money. Over the past decade, workers’ health insurance premiums have been growing as their wages have been stagnating.
“That’s the classic dilemma that pretty much every company in America currently faces,” Vox’s Sarah Kliff writes in reference to the recent changes at Harvard University. “Do they keep spending more and more on health benefits, at the cost of giving workers raises? Or do they make employees pay more and face the wrath of an angry professor with a brand new co-pay?”
Despite the frustration over the impending policy changes, Harvard professors still enjoy particularly generous benefits. Their new plan will cover an average of 91 percent of their health costs, and their new annual deductibles are still much lower than the average deductibles for people with employer-sponsored insurance. On average, individual deductibles grew from $826 in 2009 to $1,217 in 2014.
“The changes in Harvard faculty benefits are parallel to changes that all Americans are seeing,” Meredith B. Rosenthal, a professor of health economics and policy at the Harvard School of Public Health, told the New York Times. “Indeed, they have come to our front door much later than to others.”

This Company’s Move To Offer HIV-Positive People Life Insurance Shows How Far HIV Awareness Has Come
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
Prudential Insurance Company will make history this week by allowing HIV-positive people to register for the insurance company’s traditional life insurance policies — a first in an industry that traditionally leaves people struggling with chronic diseases with few options for affordable plans to protect their family members once they die.
Announced on Monday, the eve of World AIDS Day, this news comes after decades of people living with the virus being denied anything but minimal coverage from insurance providers.
Although not all details have been formally unveiled, the company has said the new plan will be available to anyone who is HIV-positive but otherwise healthy.
According to Kaiser Health News, the company made the decision after analyzing data that showed HIV-positive people ended up living much longer than expected.
“With advances in the successful treatment of people with HIV, we are now able to offer this population the opportunity to apply for life insurance — a milestone we see as a significant step in the right direction,” said Mike McFarland, underwriting vice president for Prudential, in statement.
More options for affordable life insurance — which rests on the assumption that HIV-positive people have many years of life ahead of them — could be another step toward dismantling the long-perpetrated belief that being diagnosed with HIV is a death sentence.
More than 1.2 million Americans are living with HIV, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. While a cure for the virus does not exist, life expectancy for people in the U.S. living with HIV has never been better. A recent study found that people diagnosed with HIV early in their lives usually live until their early 70s, on average. This year, the U.S. population of HIV-positive people hit a milestone: more than half of all people living with HIV are estimated to be over the age of 50.
Granted, HIV still comes with a slew of uncomfortable and exhausting symptoms, but an increasing amount of new medication and treatment plans have made them easier to manage.
Once-a-day medications recently approved by the FDA, for example, allow people to effectively manage HIV symptoms without the need to juggle dozens of drugs that need to be taken throughout the day. Other treatments can prevent HIV-positive people from transmitting the virus to their sexual partners.
Plus, Obamacare has helped increase access to health care for HIV-positive individuals, making it more likely that they’ll be able to afford the expensive treatment that keeps them healthy.
There are some signs that Americans’ attitudes about HIV are starting to evolve to reflect what researchers call the “graying” of HIV, or the idea that HIV-positive people will survive until they’re old enough to have gray hair. This changing attitude was reflected in the media’s coverage of Charlie Sheen’s recent announcement of his HIV-positive status. Many compared Sheen’s fate to that of past HIV-positive celebrities whose lives were cut short by the virus in the 80s — emphasizing the huge improvements in both treatment and public understanding of HIV since then.
“We used to manage the demise of people with a life-threatening condition,” Douglas Richman, director of the Center for AIDS Research at the University of California, San Diego, told STAT News. “Today, we counsel patients about exercise, not smoking, weight loss, and all the other things you need to do for a normal, healthy life.”
Still, HIV awareness groups and LGBT advocates have applauded the company’s move as an important step toward continuing to dismantle this stigma, and inspiring other insurers and industries to follow suit.
“Finally, an insurance company has realized that this is the right thing to do and that it is profitable from a business perspective to offer this product to people living with HIV,” Scott Schoettes, HIV Project National Director of Lambda Legal, an organization that works to protect the LGBT rights, told Kaiser Health News. “Now that there is one company out there doing this, it will encourage others to do the same when they see that there is money to be made in this market.”

EXCLUSIVE: Mourdock Argues Insurance Companies Shouldn’t Cover Birth Control At All
By Scott Keyes and Travis Waldron

WASHINGTON, D.C. — Indiana Senate nominee Richard Mourdock (R) doesn’t just want to prevent women who have been raped from obtaining an abortion; he also doesn’t think they should be able to access affordable birth control through their health insurance that could prevent such a pregnancy.
Months before Mourdock commented last night that pregnancies resulting from rape are a “gift” that “God intended,” ThinkProgress spoke with him at the 2012 Conservative Political Action Conference about Rick Santorum’s belief that insurance plans shouldn’t cover birth control at all. When asked whether he agreed with Santorum on the matter, Mourdock replied: “I do, I do.”
KEYES: I know Rick Santorum in his speech was talking a lot about this. He even went so far as to say, “I don’t think insurance plans should be covering birth control in the first place.” Do you think he’s right about that?
MOURDOCK: I do, I do. I don’t think that’s the role of government. We have to start rolling back government. There are many issues out there beyond Obamacare, but really the issue overlying everything is, is this nation going to survive? And that ultimately becomes an issue of economics.
Watch it:

Santorum’s argument goes well beyond the standard GOP opposition to the new Obamacare directive that insurance companies are required to provide contraceptive care without a co-pay. Instead, Santorum reasoned, insurance companies shouldn’t cover birth control at all, regardless of co-pay, because as he said, contraception is a “relatively small expenditure” that women shouldn’t “need insurance for.” In fact, women spend about 68 percent more than men do on their out-of-pocket health care expenses, partly because of the high cost of contraceptive services, and one in three women has reported struggling to afford birth control at some point in their lives.
Earlier this week, Mitt Romney starred in an ad for Mourdock, asking voters to “join me in supporting Richard Mourdock for U.S. Senate.” Romney has not cut an ad for any other Senate candidates in the general election.

NEW STUDY: Patients Without Insurance 21% More Likely To Die In Emergency Room Than The Insured
By Igor Volsky

Republicans are fond of saying that everyone in America has access to health care, because anyone can go to an emergency room and receive treatment. “There is a misnomer out there, I think, there’s a misconception, that somehow or another… uninsured means that you have no health care,” Gov. Rick Perry (R-TX) has said. “That’s not correct. Everyone in this country has access to health care.” This argument was most commonly deployed during the health reform debate, as conservatives tried to downplay the extent of the crisis by suggesting that everyone who needs care has access to it.
This line of argumentation has always struck me as a weak notch to hang your hat on, and now a new study suggests that it’s also deadly. A new review of intensive care units or ICUs in Pennsylvania finds that patients without insurance “were 21 percent more likely to die than insured patients”:
“Our findings suggest that ICU patients without insurance have a higher risk of death and receive less intense treatment in the ICU,” Dr. Sarah Lyon of the University of Pennsylvania, who led the study, said in a statement.
“Expanding and standardizing health care coverage through health care reform may improve outcomes in critically ill patients,” she added….”We still do not understand all the reasons for differences in survival between the insured and uninsured,” Lyon said.
“Critically ill patients without insurance may arrive to the hospital in more advanced stages of illness, perhaps in ways we could not control for in our study. Patients without insurance may also have different preferences for intensity of care at the end of life, and may not wish to be kept alive on life support as long as patients with insurance.” But there could be another reason, she said.
“Another, more concerning explanation is that physicians and hospitals treat patients without insurance differently than those with insurance. More work is needed before we can say with certainty that treatment biases caused these results.”
The analysis also found that patients with Medicaid had a 3% greater risk of death than patients with private insurance, suggesting that more needs to be done to improve access to doctors and improve quality standards.
The report also builds on an existing studies which found that thousands of Americans die every year because the lack health insurance coverage. “In September, Harvard Medical School researchers reported that nearly 45,000 people die in the United States each year because they lack health insurance.”

After Lawmaker Discloses Her Own Sexual Assault, Michigan Approves ‘Rape Insurance’ Bill Anyway
CREDIT: AP PHOTO/JOEL PAGE
On Wednesday evening, both chambers of the Michigan legislature approved a measure that will require women to purchase an additional insurance rider if they want abortion coverage, even in cases when the pregnancy resulted from rape or incest. It will take effect 90 days after lawmakers adjourn, making Michigan the ninth state to restrict coverage of abortion on the private insurance market — an increasingly popular method of imposing barriers to the procedure.
Opponents decried the legislation as a “rape insurance” bill, pointing out that victims of sexual assault would be forced to pay out-of-pocket for an abortion procedure unless they had thought ahead and purchased a separate rider. In the lead-up to the vote, State Senate Minority Leader Gretchen Whitmer (D) called the bill “one of the most misogynistic proposals” that has ever been up for debate in the legislature, adding that forcing women to consider purchasing extra insurance in case they’re raped in the future is “truly despicable.”
And during Wednesday’s floor debate, Whitmer revealed a personal story to illustrate her opposition to the legislation. The lawmaker tearfully spoke about her own experience with sexual assault, disclosing that she was raped two decades ago.
“As I was considering what to say in opposition to the rape insurance proposal in front of the Senate today, I made the decision to speak about my own story publicly for the first time ever,” the Senate Minority Leader explained. “It’s something I’ve coped with privately for many years now, but I felt it was important for my Republican colleagues to see the face of the women they’re hurting with their actions today. Thank god I didn’t get pregnant as the result of my own attack, but I can’t even begin to imagine now having to think about the same thing happening to my own daughters.”
Watch it, courtesy of Michigan Senate Democrats:

Another Democratic lawmaker, state Rep. Colleen Lamonte, shared the emotional story of a miscarriage she experienced at 12 weeks of pregnancy. Many Americans don’t realize that the medical treatment for miscarriage can fall under the category of abortion care. Lamonte pointed out that if she didn’t have insurance coverage for the dilation and curettage that was necessary to end the doomed pregnancy, her hospital bill could have been unaffordable. “I would have been denied this procedure. Or we would have had an expensive medical bill that would have bankrupted us,” the lawmaker noted.
Nonetheless, those personal stories didn’t sway Whitmer’s and Lamonte’s colleagues. The anti-choice bill passed easily, almost entirely along party lines.
Despite the fact that Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder (R) opposes this insurance ban, and actually vetoed it last year, this measure will become law in March without the governor’s signature. That’s because there’s an unusual state law in Michigan that permits “citizen-initiated” votes — so abortion opponents were able to simply circumvent the governor, collecting enough signatures to put the measure back before the legislature. This process ensures that it doesn’t need Snyder’s approval to become law.
“What’s happening in Michigan is part of an outrageous and troubling trend. In just the last five months, politicians in Texas, North Carolina, Ohio, and Michigan have broken or bent the rules to jam through abortion restrictions that the public overwhelmingly opposes,” Cecile Richards, the president of Planned Parenthood Action Fund, noted in a statement. “These extreme restrictions are so unpopular that politicians can’t pass them through the regular democratic process.”
Other states have rushed to enact similar insurance bans over the past few years, but it’s not entirely clear how “abortion riders” will work in practice. For instance, after Pennsylvania passed this type of insurance restriction over the summer, several experts confirmed to RH Reality Check that these riders simply aren’t currently available. “Most of these states that have some kind of restriction on private health plans allow for these riders, but there’s no evidence they exist,” the Guttmacher Institute’s Elizabeth Nash explained.
Even without this additional red tape, insurance coverage for abortion is already difficult to navigate. Low-income women who rely on the public Medicaid program are barred from using their insurance to pay for abortion in most states. And even the women who have private insurance typically end up paying out of pocket for the full cost of their abortion procedure — either because they simply assume it must not be covered, or because they’re worried about someone else finding out. The women who are relying on insurance coverage to pay for this care are typically the women who are having complicated and expensive procedures that involve a hospital stay, like miscarriage treatment.

Bill Clinton says Hillary Clinton helped ‘get done’ the Children’s Health Insurance Program
Bill Clinton addresses the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia on July 26, 2016.
By Alan Gathright and Amy Sherman, PolitiFact
Former President Bill Clinton said that after health care reform failed in the 1990s because they couldn’t break a Senate filibuster, Hillary Clinton sought to tackle health care reform piece by piece, including expanding health insurance for children.
“In 1997, Congress passed the Children’s Health Insurance Program, still an important part of President Obama’s Affordable Care Act. It insures more than 8 million kids,” Clinton said in his speech at the second night of the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia. “There are a lot of other things in that bill she got done, piece by piece, pushing that rock up the hill.”
We will fact-check Hillary Clinton’s role in expanding health care for children.
Children’s Health Insurance Program
We have previously rated a few claims related to her role in the Children’s Health Insurance Program, known as CHIP. Some claims have been more careful in their wording about her role than others. We could not reach a Bill Clinton spokesman, but we previously interviewed a Hillary Clinton spokesman on the same topic.
The CHIP program provides health care coverage to more than 8 million children,according to Medicaid. Created in 1997, when it was known as the State Children’s Health Insurance Program, it promotes health coverage for low-income children by providing federal funding to states.
The late-Sen. Ted Kennedy, D-Mass. received much of the credit for CHIP, because he shepherded the legislation through a Republican-controlled Congress. Utah Sen. Orrin Hatch was the lead Republican cosponsor.
In 2007, Kennedy told the Associated Press that Hillary Clinton played a critical role.
“The children’s health program wouldn’t be in existence today if we didn’t have Hillary pushing for it from the other end of Pennsylvania Avenue,” Kennedy said.
Nick Littlefield, a senior health adviser to Kennedy at the time, agreed.
“She wasn’t a legislator, she didn’t write the law, and she wasn’t the president, so she didn’t make the decisions,” Littlefield told the Associated Press. “But we relied on her, worked with her and she was pivotal in encouraging the White House to do it.”
Shortly after the legislation passed, the New York Times reported, “Participants in the campaign for the health bill both on and off Capitol Hill said the first lady had played a crucial behind-the-scenes role in lining up White House support.”
The Washington Post The Fact Checker examined her claim in an ad that she worked with Democrats and Republicans to get the law passed and concluded that was questionable. While she worked behind the scenes on the legislation, the Fact Checker wrote that there was no evidence she worked with members of both parties and instead worked with White House staff and Kennedy’s office — not Hatch.
“The White House wasn’t for it. We really roughed them up” in trying to get it approved over the Clinton administration’s objections, Hatch told the Boston Globein 2008. “She may have done some advocacy (privately) over at the White House, but I’m not aware of it.
Hatch added “I do like her,” referring to Hillary Clinton. “We all care about children. But does she deserve credit for SCHIP? No — Teddy does, but she doesn’t.”
Our ruling
Bill Clinton said Hillary Clinton sought to expand health care piecemeal including the “Children’s Health Insurance Program.”
Clinton did work behind the scenes to create the program to offer healthcare to children. He avoided specifying how much credit she should get for that and whether she worked with both parties to make that happen.
We rate this claim Mostly True.
SOURCES
PolitiFact, “Did Hillary Clinton win health care for 8 million children as first lady?” Feb. 17, 2016
Medicaid.gov, “Children’s Health Insurance Program”
HillaryClinton.com, “Affordable health care is a basic human right”
Associated Press, “Clinton Claims Credit for Child Program, “ October 5, 2007
PolitiFact.com, “Standing up, but not alone,” October 8th, 2007
PolitiFact.com, “Clinton promoted children’s health care,” January 6, 2008
Washington Post The Fact Checker, “Clinton’s claim of working with Democrats and Republicans to create a child health program,” June 20, 2016
Boston Globe, “Clinton role in health program disputed,”March 14, 2008
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, “Children’s Health Coverage: Medicaid, CHIP and the ACA,” March 26, 2014
David Nexon, Senator Ted Kennedy’s former health care staff director, on Medium, “I was there when Hillary Clinton helped lead the bipartisan effort to create the Children’s Health Insurance Program,” June 24, 2016
PolitiFact is covering the 2016 Republican and Democratic national conventions on Medium as part of a grant from the Knight Foundation.

When Your Health Insurance Drops Your Hospital, Which Means You Must Drop It

Babygirl loves the song “I Won’t Grow Up” from the show Peter Pan. She finds it fascinating. The first time I showed her a video of it, she was entranced and wanted to see it over and over; when she was ready, at least momentarily, to move on from that, she said, “Now the one where they do want to grow up!” (After a moment of bafflement, I showed her “I Just Can’t Wait To Be King,” which she deemed acceptable, though nowhere near as compelling.)
By this point, I have the Lost Boys’ song memorized and a bit of a chip on my shoulder, frankly, about Peter, who appears to be a fascist. In one verse, a Lost Boy stands up and pledges:
I won’t grow up
I will never even try
I will do what Peter tells me
And I’ll never ask him why.
Creepy, right? Another adds:
I won’t grow up
No I promise that I won’t
I will stay a boy forever!
And be banished if I don’t.
Peter gives that sentiment the big thumbs up. Thanks a lot, Commandant.
I’m feeling more in sympathy with the Lost Boys these days, as I’m forced to adult as hard as I can on several fronts at once. Like, here’s one thing. It’s open season again on the Health Insurance Marketplace! But the site was prohibitively buggy when I tried to go through it yesterday and the wait time for help by phone was well over thirty minutes. For the sake of my blood pressure, I had to quit and figure I’d try again.
I need the info in the Marketplace even more than I thought I would, too, because I got a letter from my current provider, Oscar, letting me know that they’ve decided to part ways with an entire hospital system, effective December 1. This affects me, rather, since the system that they’ve decided will no longer be in network includes the hospital where I gave birth last time and where I am scheduled to give birth this time as well. It is in fact the only place where my midwives deliver.
Just like that, I have to find new insurance.
Maybe it’s for the best. As I’ve mentioned, according to the Times, a lot of consumers err in choosing a plan. We think we can rely on ourselves to get the best deal. We can’t.
Eric Johnson, a Columbia business professor, led a study that found that without substantial additional assistance, a consumer’s likelihood of selecting the lowest-cost plan is no better than chance. The researchers conducted a series of experiments on people similar to those who would shop for marketplace coverage. Each study participant was asked to presume he’d use a certain amount of health care and, based on that, to choose the lowest-cost plan from among eight choices, which varied by premium, doctor co-pay and deductible. Only 21 percent could accomplish this task, a figure not statistically different from chance. The annual cost of errors was about $250. …
Another way consumers get stuck with bad deals is by staying in plans as their premiums increase, a status quo bias. One study found that New Jersey enrollees in Medicare prescription drug plans paid an average of $536 more over three years because of this kind of inertia. Some insurers strategically enter markets with low prices and increase them over time, exploiting consumers’ inertia. This “invest then harvest” pricing strategy has been observed in markets for Medicare Advantage plans, commercial health insurance and others.
By being forced to choose something else, it’s possible I’ll end up with a more affordable situation. Still, it’s a bummer, since overall I was satisfied with my coverage, and now I have to start from scratch.
Sing it with me, y’all:
’Cause growing up is awfuller
Than all the awful things there ever were …
I’ll never grow up, never grow up, never grow up, no, sir!

Many Catholic Universities, Hospitals Already Cover Contraception In Their Health Insurance Plans
By Igor Volsky

Catholic leaders and the GOP presidential candidates have intentionally distorted the Obama administration’s new rule requiring employers and insurers to provide reproductive health benefits at no additional cost sharing. Conservatives are seeking a way to politically unite Republican voters around a social issue and portray the regulation as a big government intrusion into religious liberties. In reality, the mandate is modeled on existing rules in six states, exempts houses of worship and other religious nonprofits that primarily employ and serve people of faith, and offers employers a transitional period of one year to determine how best to comply with the rule.
It’s also nothing new. Twenty-eight states already require organizations that offer prescription insurance to cover contraception and since 98 percent of Catholic women use birth control, many Catholic institutions offer the benefit to their employees. For instance, a Georgetown University spokesperson told ThinkProgress yesterday that employees “have access to health insurance plans offered and designed by national providers to a national pool. These plans include coverage for birth control.”
Similarly, an informal survey conducted by Our Sunday Visitor found that many Catholic colleges have purchased insurance plans that provide contraception benefits:
University of Scranton, for example, appears to specifically cover contraception. The University of San Francisco offers employees two health plans, both of which cover abortion, contraception and sterilization…Also problematic is the Jesuit University of Scranton. One of its health insurance plans, the First Priority HMO, lists a benefit of “contraceptives when used for the purpose of birth control.”
DePaul University in Chicago covers birth control in both its fully insured HMO plan and its self-insured PPO plan and excludes “elective abortion,” said spokesman John Holden, adding that the 1,800 employee-university responded to a complaint from the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission several years ago and added artificial contraception as a benefit to its Blue Cross PPO.
Christian Brothers University in Memphis, Tenn., offers employee health insurance via the Tennessee Independent Colleges and Universities Association, a consortium of Christian Bible and other private college and universities. Its plan excludes abortion, but probably covers artificial contraception as a prescription drug, said C. Gregg Conroy, the executive director of the TICUA Benefit Consortium.
Boston College, the six former Caritas Christi Catholic hospitals in Massachusetts, and other Catholic organizations that are located in one of the 28 states that already require employers to provide contraception benefits could have self-insured or stopped offering prescription drug coverage to avoid the mandate — but didn’t do so. Instead, they — like many Catholic hospitals and health care insurers around the country — chose to meet the needs of the overwhelming majority of Catholic women and offer these much needed services.

University of Missouri Grad Students Received 14 Hours Notice on Health Insurance Cancellation

When I went to grad school a decade ago, I received health insurance as part of my tuition and benefits package. It wasn’t the world’s best health insurance — when I fell down a flight of stairs, broke my big toe in three places, and needed foot surgery, I spent months paying off the out-of-pocket cost in installments — but it was a very good thing to have.
I went to grad school at Illinois State, and back when I was applying to grad schools I also sent in an application to the University of Missouri (aka “Mizzou”). Well, Mizzou just announced that it was changing its health insurance program, giving grad students 14 hours notice to find other coverage.
From Missouri public radio station KBIA:
On Friday, many University of Missouri graduate students found out via email they would no longer receive help from the university to pay for their health insurance.
[…]
Graduate students received this news little more than 14 hours before graduate student health insurance coverage lapsed. This decision affects graduate students from every department who work for MU as teaching assistants, research assistants and library assistants.
Notice that KBIA used the phrase “help from the university to pay for their health insurance” rather than “health insurance.” That’s the big problem here. Mizzou explains this in a Q&A recently posted to their Graduate Studies website:
Due to changes in federal policy and IRS interpretation of that policy, general counsel has informed us that the University of Missouri no longer is allowed to pay for graduate students’ health insurance. (Previously, the university provided a subsidy to those students who opted in for insurance and were paid from a qualifying assistantship or fellowship). The IRS considers our student health insurance plan an “individual-market plan” rather than an “employer-sponsored plan,” such as our health plans for MU employees.
The Affordable Care Act prevents employers from giving employees money specifically so they can buy health insurance on the individual market. Graduate teaching and research assistants are classified as employees by the IRS, so they fall under this ruling.
The university is going to do its part to get around the federal policy:
Based on these reviews, we have decided to allocate one-time fellowships to all graduate student employees in qualifying HR titles. We will calculate the amount of the fellowships based on how many hours students work per week. These fellowships will be in addition to the stipends students receive from their academic units for work.
Because we are prohibited by law from linking this money to health insurance in any way, we are unable to ask students whether they need health insurance or plan to purchase insurance.
One of the Q&A questions is, of course, the obvious one: why not just treat grad student employees the same as other employees and give them employee health insurance?
Employee health insurance plans are only available to full-time, benefit-eligible employees. Part-time employees, regardless of whether they are students, are not eligible to purchase this benefit.
Well, there you go. You aren’t eligible for employee health insurance because you are a part-time employee, but you can’t receive a health insurance stipend because you are a part-time employee.
But hey, some grad students are going to receive fellowships! Which they can spend on health insurance, or maybe on food or rent. We can’t legally tell you what to do with this money, or ask whether you used it on health insurance.
I bet some grad students are going to be very tempted to not use the fellowship on health insurance, because the fellowship is $1,240 per semester for a student working half-time and $620 for a student working quarter-time, and the fine for not having health insurance is only $325.
There’s also the question of what grad students are going to do between now, when their insurance is expired, and when the fellowships arrive. KBIA shares the story of PhD candidate Jennifer McKinney Wilson, who is likely to give birth during her lapse in coverage:
“When we found out on Friday that we lost our insurance, I was 22 days away from my delivery date,” McKinney Wilson said.
Now she says she is 19 days away, already in labor, and has had no health insurance since Friday.
“Being a graduate student has always been a little difficult and challenging,” Mckinney Wilson said. “I mean you have to make sacrifices to be here. Most of us took cuts in pay and things to come here. So up until today there were sacrifices, but they were doable. And now it doesn’t seem so doable.”
Is it possible for someone like McKinney Wilson to hop onto HealthCare.gov, fill out the forms, and get health insurance before her child is born? I went to HealthCare.gov to check it out, and it looks like “becoming pregnant” does not count as a qualifying life event for Special Enrollment, although “giving birth” does.
On the plus side, “losing your health insurance” does count as a Special Enrollment event. I wonder if that means “losing your health insurance stipend,” too.
This story is part of our College Month series.
Photo credit: Adam Procter

Experts: Pending Health Insurance Mergers Will Hit Patients Right In The Wallet
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
By Sam P.K. Collins
Impending multi-billion health insurance mergers involving four major providers have drawn the ire of patient advocacy groups that say such deals violate antitrust laws and threaten to fatten insurance companies’ coffers at patients’ expense.
Earlier this year, Anthem, Inc. made a $47.5 billion bid for Cigna Corp and Aetna, Inc. proposed a takeover of Humana Inc. Meanwhile, UnitedHealth Group, currently the nation’s largest insurer, also approached Aetna. These deals, if they come to fruition, would create a trinity of mega-insurance companies, each one generating more than $100 billion revenue annually. Justice Department officials have geared up to examine the mergers to see if they would benefit consumers.
A study by the American Medical Association (AMA), however, suggests that may not be the case, pointing out that a small group of companies already dominate a significant number of insurance markets in the United States. The consolidation of Anthem and Cigna and Aetna and Humana, AMA representatives say, will reduce options in the market for Medicare recipients, particularly those enrolled in the private Medicare Advantage plan.
“A lack of competition in health insurer markets is not in the best interests of patients or physicians,” AMA President Steven J. Stack, M.D said in a press statement. “If a health insurer merger is likely to erode competition, employers and patients may be charged higher than competitive premiums, and physicians may be pressured to accept unfair terms that undermine their role as patient advocates and their ability to provide high-quality care. Given these factors, AMA is urging federal and state regulators to carefully review the proposed mergers and use enforcement tools to preserve competition.”
The analysis, required by the Affordable Care Act (ACA), found that the three largest insurers in more than 30 states commanded at least 80 percent of enrollment. In more than half of the states, a single provider had more than half of the total enrollees. Though hospitals acquired physicians groups, AMA said 60 percent of doctors worked with practices with fewer than 10 patients. Citing federal antitrust laws, the medical group said that further consolidation would allow insurance companies to raise prices and reduce quality the detriment of insurance holders.
This study follows the American Hospital Association’s letter to the Justice Department that scrutinizes the Aetna-Humana merger, which it described as a threat to competition in up to 154 metropolitan areas in 23 states. The Commonwealth Fund also released a study that found that the Aetna-Humana merger would drive up prices for seniors, especially since there was high concentration among nearly 97 percent of Medicare Advantage markets. A study published in a Harvard-affiliated peer review journal in August predicted that insurers would “bulk up” so that they can dominate their marketplace and raise rates without consequence.
Since the ACA’s passage, the Justice Department has challenged health insurance mergers focusing on its effect on local and regional markets. In 2010, Michigan’s Blue Cross Blue Shield reneged on its consolidation with an in-state competitor after the Justice Department threatened to block the deal with an antitrust lawsuit. In 2012, officials scrutinized Humana’s acquisition of Arcadian Management Services, Inc., a health care services company. The health companies responded by divesting its Medicare Advantage plans in 51 counties and parishes.
The future of the deals currently under question have yet to be determined. While insurers waved off criticism about the merger, saying doctors and hospitals are fearful that bigger companies would cut their payments, concerned parties say the ACA protects against premium hikes that the merger would bring.
A key tenet of the ACA centers on lower premiums via increased competition between insurers in marketplaces. Obama administration officials told the New York Times earlier this year that consumers, sensitive to price changes, reacted to a wider variety of choices by switching over to lower premium plans during the 2014 open enrollment window. That led insurance companies to keep premiums as low as possible to attract customers, as found in a county-level analysis conducted by the federal government last year that showed more moderate increases in health care premiums, compared to years past. That year, nearly 60 percent of counties had an increase in the number of the insurers offering health plans, while fewer than 10 percent experienced a decline.
Obamacare opponents say the health care law includes provisions that may have spurred the consolidation, including a requirement that insurers spend a percentage of premiums of health care, a rule that critics say forces companies to cut administrative costs by merging. GOP lawmakers wasted little time in July blaming Obamacare for proposed mergers, rehashing arguments that the insurance law would place smaller providers at a disadvantage and drive up premiums.
But an investigation conducted by the Center for Public Integrity (CPI) challenged those allegations, outlining other factors that influenced the mergers. Those causes, CPI’s Wendell Potter says, include the increasing number of Baby Boomers rushing to the Medicare rolls. In his piece, Potter also pointed to previous consolidations in the 1990s that created the current trifecta of major insurance companies and a shrinking employer-based health insurance market that has been on the decline since the turn of the century.

Evangelical College Ends Students’ Health Insurance Altogether To Avoid Covering Birth Control
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
In a dramatic stand against Obamacare’s birth control coverage requirement, an evangelical college has opted to end its student health insurance plans altogether so it won’t need to worry about indirectly facilitating Americans’ access to contraception.
According to the Chicago Tribune, officials at Wheaton College, a conservative Christian school in Illinois, are eliminating health care coverage in a move that will affect about a quarter of the college’s 3,000 undergraduate and graduate students. Now, those students have just a few weeks to shop for new plans before their current coverage ends.
Wheaton’s student development vice president, Paul Chelsen, told students during an information session last week that individuals who are losing insurance may be eligible for “hardship funding” from the school to help them afford new plans.
“I acknowledge that students have been hurt by this decision and I regret that,” Chelsen said during that session, according to a recording that was obtained by the Chicago Tribune. However, he added that the school believes this is the right move because the stakes are too high in the ongoing fight against the health law.
Wheaton College is currently challenging Obamacare in a case that officials hope may make it all the way to the Supreme Court. It’s been an uphill battle for the Christian school; earlier this month, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit ruled against its arguments.
Essentially, officials at Wheaton object to the religious compromise laid out by the Obama administration two years ago. The workaround requires faith-based institutions that object to birth control to fill out a form to notify the government; then, insurance providers can directly extend contraception coverage to beneficiaries so that the institution itself doesn’t have to be involved. Some religious leaders have accepted this compromise, but particularly right-wing critics of the health law — including Wheaton College — say that even the act of filling out a form makes them too complicit in providing coverage for certain forms of birth control.
Federal appeals courts haven’t been very sympathetic to this point of view, and have consistently ruled that submitting a form does not pose a substantial burden to religious liberty.
The Seventh Circuit’s ruling against Wheaton, which was seeking an emergency injunction against Obamacare’s birth control policy while its legal case proceeds, “hastened the college’s decision to drop the students’ health care coverage,” according to the Chicago Tribune.
Other conservative schools have made similar decisions during the contentious battle over Obamacare’s contraceptive coverage requirement. Back in 2012, Franciscan University, a small Catholic college in Ohio, decided to drop its health insurance coverage for students instead of working to comply with Obamacare. Officials there said it was a preventative measure because they were afraid of “one day having to provide coverage for contraception.”
Most religious groups in the United States don’t oppose the use of birth control. Even the vast majority of Catholics — the group whose leadership has been most vocal in opposition to Obamacare’s contraceptive mandate — say that birth control is morally acceptable.
Nonetheless, there’s been an ongoing fight over the health care reform law, which requires employer-sponsored health plans to cover all FDA-approved methods of contraception, because some conservative religious groups argue that certain forms of birth control are abortifacients. Wheaton officials are among the right-wing critics who claim that IUDs and emergency contraception can actually end a pregnancy, even though scientists say otherwise.
Wheaton has recently been in the news because of other aspects of its conservative approach to campus life, too. Earlier this month, an openly gay but willingly celibate chaplain resigned from her position at the school within 24 hours of expressing her support for marriage equality, raising some questions about whether she was pushed out.

Indiana Sues To Prevent Its Own Residents From Receiving Obamacare’s Insurance Subsidies

By Sy Mukherjee
Indiana Attorney General Greg Zoeller (R) CREDIT: Indiana State Government
This week, Indiana Attorney General Greg Zoeller filed a lawsuit against the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) challenging its authority to fund Obamacare’s insurance subsidies for individuals and enacting penalties against public employers (such as state and local governments) that don’t meet the health law’s minimum worker coverage requirement. If successful, the challenge would prevent Americans from receiving the government assistance that makes Obamacare’s insurance marketplace plans affordable in the first place.
Zoeller claims that the health law doesn’t permit people living in the 36 states that have refused to set up their own Obamacare marketplaces — including Indiana — to qualify for federal insurance subsidies. He also says that local government employers which don’t meet Obamacare’s requirements cannot be penalized under the law to help fund those subsidies.
The argument is based on a technical ambiguity in the law that state-level GOP officials and congressional Republicans have previously seized on in an attempt to undermine the ACA’s consumer assistance. The IRS has issued regulations saying that the law permits and intends the agency to extend subsidies to Americans in all 50 states.
“The fact that many citizens lack health insurance is an issue for policymakers, and my office takes no position regarding the congressional debate over funding the ACA. I never complain when private plaintiffs file lawsuits to challenge the state authority that my office defends; but now our role is reversed and Indiana has initiated this lawsuit asking the court whether the IRS has exceeded its federal taxing authority over state governments,” said Zoeller in a statement. “This respectful challenge is an appropriate role for the Office of the Attorney General to vigorously assert the ability of the State and its political subdivisions to manage their workforces in our American system of federalism.”
Zoeller argues that Congress would have to pass separate legislation in order for Americans to qualify for tax credits in the states that haven’t set up an Obamacare marketplace.
If the lawsuit is successful, it would amount to a massive premium hike for Americans who are required to procure insurance coverage under the health law — and could fundamentally cripple Obamacare’s goal of extending affordable health coverage to the uninsured. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimates that over 85 percent of individuals who sign up through the marketplaces this year will qualify for subsidies to help them afford their new plans. Those subsidies can end up reducing the top-line cost of health coverage by as much as the full premium amount, depending on an individual’s yearly income.
Oklahoma has filed a similar lawsuit against the federal government. Several GOP-led states have taken alternative tactics to undermine reform, such as refusing to implement the law’s basic consumer protections like its ban on insurers denying coverage to Americans with pre-existing medical conditions. And many red states are successfully denying coverage to poor Americans by refusing to expand Medicaid under the health law.

Do You Have Health Insurance?

Some people have health insurance, and some people don’t. Do you have health insurance?
• Greg Barto
I didn’t have it for years, but I have it now through my job. I pay $50 to $75 per paycheck, I think. I don’t know how much it costs to go to the doctor because I haven’t been.
• Zack Cohn
I have Easy Choice Health Plan aka Healthy NY (it has two names I guess?). It costs $241.44/month. I have a $20 copay. I believe I get one physical a year covered and I recently found out that I have some network of bottom-tier doctors I can visit and receive some measure of coverage from, but I haven’t investigated it yet.
• Mike Dang Mine just ended last week! So I’m going to have to find something that will work for me and my left ventricular arrythomogenic cardiomyopathy. Or pay $700 a month for COBRA.
• William Foster
I do not have health insurance, as I am immortal and immune to injury and disease.
• Carrie Frye
Yes — my husband and I have insurance through our corporation (employees: us). Having a corporation with just two employees is probably overkill, and the paperwork is a pain, but one benefit is that the company can pay for health insurance. We pay $800/monthly for a shared policy, which is high! I don’t know — I looked rickety to the insurance company. Also: We keep a who-knows-might-have-a-baby rider on there that adds a couple hundred dollars a month (my understanding is that if a baby never materializes, the insurance eventually refunds you a $50 Zingerman’s gift certificate).
• Adam Frucci
I have insurance through the Freelancers Union/Blue Cross, and I pay $319/month. I think I can see a doctor for $35.
• Emily Gould I have Freelancer’s Union insurance. I pay around $400 a month. For more incomprehensible information see here. My plan is PPO 3.
• Cord Jefferson I do indeed have health insurance through my employer. I have the HMO plan, which costs me somewhere around $32 per month. If I’m remembering correctly, my plan has no deductible and a copay limit of $1,750. And my annual out of pocket maximum is $2,000. Of course, this could all be incorrect. The details tend to be hazy, as I avoid going to the doctor unless I need to crawl there (I’ve also been very lucky to be healthy for most of my adult life).
• Lisa Lenner
I have it through work. I pay about $66 per paycheck ($132/month). It’s a PPO, which I probably don’t need… but I like having it. Two years ago when I got my tonsils out, I didn’t have to pay for any of that, which is awesome since it was a totally optional surgery. I didn’t need my tonsils out. I just didn’t have anything to do at work.
• Bennett Madison I get insurance the most practical way — by having a day job! I don’t pay anything for it because my boss pays the whole thing. Before I had a day job, I was going to get it through the Author’s Guild which at the time seemed relatively cheap, but I never got around to it.
• Amy Merrick Girl you always know the questions to ask to make me feel crazy. No insurance.
• Jennifer Pan
I am fortunate enough that my job gives me health insurance! I’ve never bought my own — just lived stupidly without any insurance when it wasn’t employer-sponsored. :(
• Matt Powers I am still on my parent’s health insurance thanks to President Obama increasing the amount of time children can stay on their parent’s health insurance (26). I’m only really insured in Massachusetts, so I can only go to hospitals or “urgent care” if I’m in an accident or really sick or something, and then I have to pay the copay which is usually like $20-$40, but because I am incredibly healthy I’ve only used it once while living in New York. I don’t pay for my health insurance because I am not a person.
• Bryan Rogers
At my last job, I paid $0. The company paid 100% of all premiums for employees and all dependents (!!!). That’s pretty much unheard of. At my new job, I pay $45/month.
• Nancy Rommelmann Yes, I have health insurance. Here’s why and how: As a freelancer, it was never available to me. I mostly scraped by without, as did my husband Din, who never in his life had it. Then he launched Ristretto Roasters , and we figured we’d offer it. We use Kaiser, an HMO, with a $3k deductible, but you get pretty much everything taken care of for a $25 copayment when you visit. We provide it for our employees if they work 30 hours a week or more. They pay $52 from each paycheck (every two weeks), so $104 a month, which we match. It does not include dental, but it’s seriously great coverage, everything from routine tests to surgery. We’ve been really happy with it. We can also cover people’s spouses (domestic partner or marriage) and kids. It’s by the person so, for instance, Din, Tafv and I pay a family rate of $624/month, because of course we are paying our own copayment. Din and I could pocket the money we pay for our employees and take an extra trip to Maui, but as my dad says, we offer it because it’s the right thing to do, and because no one ever did it for us.
• Alex Sachon
I have an independent plan through Kaiser Permanente. It was $132, but they just increased it to $164. I’ve never used it once. I called, and they said in order to find out why, I had to FAX THEM. I understand on some level why health care costs keep rising, but for bare bones health care, for someone who NEVER HAS USED IT, why on earth should it increase each year? I find it really upsetting.
• Logan Sachon I have a plan through PacificSource, which is a company based in the Pacific Northwest. I got it when I lived in Portland and they haven’t kicked me off yet even though I no longer live in Portland. I pay $132 a month, and I can go to the doctor for $30, but have to pay for all tests and everything because my deductible is $5,000. I’ve never reached it, probably because my policy doesn’t cover mental health, and that’s where all my medical dollars go.
• Nozlee Samadzadeh I didn’t have it and now I do! I’m on my parents’ health insurance because it doesn’t cost them extra for me to be on it. I actually thought about it a lot before doing it — I WANTED to be independent, but it added $6,000 to my salary not to have insurance through work, and doesn’t cost my parents anything extra. Hooray Obama!
• Angela Serratore I have health insurance through school (I am pretty sure people only go to grad school for health insurance). I pay 700 bucks a semester, which is a not-small amount to me, but any appointment I make with a school doctor is free — general practitioner stuff, but also I go to a university with pretty great medical facilities, so I’ve yet to need a specialist that hasn’t existed on campus. Co-pay for not-at-school doctors is 20 bucks, and I think I paid 10 dollars for my last prescription?
• Choire Sicha I have it through Aetna and pay $150/month. I went with it because it cheap and easy. It covers like nothing in the day-to-day, but after a huge deductible, it covers 100%. Like, if I get cancer, I spend $5K. Then it covers everything.
• Eric Spiegelman I have been a 1099 for a few years so no benefits. I got a private policy from UnitedHealthcare (which is PacificCare in California). My premium is like $200 — not sure exactly how much because I have the bill on autopay so my coverage never lapses. I’m stuck in traffic right now so can’t check my deductible, but I know my copay is $40. At the moment I do not have dental insurance or vision. Once upon a time I was on TimeWarner’s rockstar policy, which would send an ambulance if I stubbed a toe, and I tried to keep that on COBRA until I realized it cost $650 per month. COBRA: not really that helpful!
• Edith Zimmerman I have Freelancers Union insurance, and I pay $345 a month. I have a $30 co-pay and … I’m not sure the other stuff! Shit.

No, Car Rental Insurance is Not Mandatory*

Car rental insurance isn’t required. Or is it?
If you’re not sure, then you’re one of many confused car renters — a confusion some car rental companies appear to be taking advantage of.
Consider what happened to Nancy Ferguson when she rented a car from Avis at the Indianapolis airport recently. When she tried to decline Avis’ collision-damage waiver, noting that her credit card covered her, a representative told her that was “not allowed.”
“He said if I didn’t buy Avis’ insurance, I could not get the car,” says Ferguson, a pharmacist from Greenbrae, Calif.
Wrong. Avis’ site describes its liability waivers as “optional.” But the misunderstanding netted Avis an extra $414, according to Ferguson.
Related: Everything you ever wanted to know about car rentals and insurance (but were afraid to ask).
Why is everyone so confused? Because, well, it’s confusing.
States require car rental companies to carry insurance on their vehicles. But there’s no corresponding law that says you have to purchase insurance, which technically isn’t insurance, but an expensive and highly profitable collision-damage waiver (CDW) or loss-damage waiver (LDW) product sold by your car rental company. With the help of a few half-truths, a clever car rental agent can push you into buying pricey coverage.
Optional collision-damage waivers represent a “significant” source of income for car rental companies, although no one except the car rental companies knows how significant, according to car rental consultant Neil Abrams. Optional damage waivers are strongly encouraged by car rental companies, even though customers may already be covered by auto insurance, a credit card or travel insurance. The policies can routinely double the cost of your rental.
While an overwhelming majority of rentals are free of misunderstandings, a “tiny percent” may end with a car rental company turning away a customer because of a paperwork problem.
“Yes, they can refuse to rent a car,” Abrams says. “There is extreme liability and cost associated with vehicle damage, loss or worse. The rental of a vehicle is a privilege, not a right, but the operators do have the right to protect their assets, passengers and the general public.”
That’s exactly what happened to Cheryl Manzo when she rented from Economy Rent a Car in Orlando recently.
“When I arrived to pick up rental Saturday morning, a representative told me I had to pay additional $73 for insurance,” she remembers.
The reason? “I did not have my policy declaration page with me,” she says.
Manzo, a teacher from Levittown, Pa., reluctantly paid for the coverage. When I asked her car rental company about her case, it said it had a right to ask her for proof of insurance.
“The customer needs to understand that we are serving her with a $20,000 vehicle,” said Patricia Grant, an Economy representative. “The least we can do is verify coverage.”
Car rental agents don’t force everyone to buy CDW. A young couple on the van ride back to the airport told Grant they didn’t have to show proof of their insurance. Travelers I’ve spoken to felt they were singled out for being the most vulnerable-looking customers, particularly those with foreign passports.
Take Samantha Sigler, for example. She rented a car in Orlando from Thrifty recently after arriving from Ottawa.
“When I arrived at the airport, an agent asked me if I was interested in obtaining additional insurance coverage for the car,” Sigler says.
She said her Canadian insurance covered her.
“The agent told me that it was mandatory for me to purchase Liability Insurance Supplement coverage pursuant to Florida state law, as there was no way that the state of Florida would cover the cost of an accident that could be over $1 million,” she says.
That’s incorrect. Sigler bought the additional insurance to avoid a confrontation, but she checked the Florida statutes to be sure. And why wouldn’t she? Sigler is a lawyer. Thrifty promptly refunded the insurance supplement.
“This agent may have tricked and conned numerous other tourists,” she says. The company “should be putting necessary and appropriate checks into place to ensure that their agents do not dishonestly line their pockets at the expense of others.”
Lauren Luster, a spokeswoman for Hertz, which owns Thrifty, says Sigler is correct. “We do not require that our customers have car insurance,” she says. “We offer optional car rental protection which is available for purchase by customers, many of whom are often navigating unfamiliar places in an unfamiliar vehicle while on a business trip or vacation.”
I checked with the other car rental companies, and that policy — that coverage is optional — is an industry standard in the United States.
By the way, I’ll second the sentiment expressed by car rental companies. Insurance is a good idea; you should not drive a car without coverage — but it doesn’t have to be the car rental company’s coverage. You can buy a insurance through an online agency or a site like Insuremyrentalcar.com for about half the price of auto rental protection.
So where does that leave you? Car rental companies will sometimes say anything to persuade you to buy their coverage, including bending a few facts and withholding the car keys. You need to be ready with ample documentation of coverage and a little knowledge of state insurance law (see below). That’s the only fix — you have to fight fallacy with facts.
What insurance do you really need?
• Domestic rentals: Any car rental insurance requirements are in the state’s laws, which are readily available online. For example, Florida statutes say that if you’re renting a car for less than a year, the owner is the car rental company and is responsible for insurance. (It’s in Chapter 324 of the Florida Statutes.) A car rental company may try to shift that responsibility to you, but there’s no law that requires you to accept it.
• International rentals: If you’re renting overseas, check the car rental company’s website or call for information. Or you can check out Autoeurope.com, which lists detailed insurance requirements by country.
* Some restrictions apply.
After you’ve left a comment here, let’s continue the discussion on my consumer advocacy site or on Twitter, Facebook and Google. I also have a newsletter and you’ll definitely want to order my new, amazingly helpful and subversive book called How to Be the World’s Smartest Traveler (and Save Time, Money, and Hassle).

The Real Reason That The Cancer Patient Writing In Today’s Wall Street Journal Lost Her Insurance

By Igor Volsky

Monday’s Wall Street Journal features an op-ed from Edie Littlefield Sundby, a stage-4 gallbladder cancer survivor who won’t be able to keep the coverage she currently has. Her insurer, United Healthcare, is pulling out of the individual health care market, forcing Sundby to find new coverage in California’s health care exchange.
But the plans available through Cover California don’t offer in-network coverage for all of the care Sundby needs. As a result, she has to choose between her two health care providers if she wishes to remain in-network. “Stanford has kept me alive — but UCSD has provided emergency and local treatment support during wretched periods of this disease, and it is where my primary-care doctors are,” she writes:
What happened to the president’s promise, “You can keep your health plan”? Or to the promise that “You can keep your doctor”? Thanks to the law, I have been forced to give up a world-class health plan. The exchange would force me to give up a world-class physician.
But Sundby shouldn’t blame reform — United Healthcare dropped her coverage because they’ve struggled to compete in California’s individual health care market for years and didn’t want to pay for sicker patients like Sundby.
The company, which only had 8,000 individual policy holders in California out of the two million who participate in the market, announced (along with a second insurer, Aetna) that it would be pulling out of the individual market in May. The company could not compete with Anthem Blue Cross, Blue Shield of California and Kaiser Permanente, who control more than 80 percent of the individual market. “Over the years, it has become more difficult to administer these plans in a cost-effective way for our members,” UnitedHealth spokeswoman Cheryl Randolph explained. “We will continue to keep a major presence in California, focusing instead on large and small employers.”
The two insurers were also operating at a tax disadvantage in the state. As California Insurance Commissioner Dave Jones explained, “One of the factors I believe contributed to this decision….is the special tax break that California law gives to Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, which has allowed and continues to allow those two companies to avoid paying $100 million in state taxes a year.” “Aetna and United Healthcare don’t get the special tax break provided to Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, and so they faced a major competitive disadvantage in California.”
And then there is the company’s own justification for leaving. “The company’s plans reflect its concern that the first wave of newly insured customers under the law may be the costliest,” UHC Chief Executive Officer Stephen Helmsley told investors last October. “UnitedHealth will watch and see how the exchanges evolve and expects the first enrollees will have ‘a pent-up appetite’ for medical care. We are approaching them with some degree of caution because of that.”
Get that? The company packed its bags and dumped its beneficiaries because it wants its competitors to swallow the first wave of sicker enrollees only to re-enter the market later and profit from the healthy people who still haven’t signed up for coverage.
Sundby is losing her coverage and her doctors because of a business decision her insurer made within the competitive dynamics of California’s health care market. She’ll now have to enroll in a new plan that offers tighter networks of providers as a way to control health care costs and offer lower premiums. Eleven insurers are participating in Covered California and for the first time they won’t be able to deny coverage to Sundby or any other cancer patients.

MEMO: Health insurance, banking, oil industries met with Koch, Chamber, Glenn Beck to plot 2010 election

In 2006, Koch Industries owner Charles Koch revealed to the Wall Street Journal’s Stephen Moore that he coordinates the funding of the conservative infrastructure of front groups, political campaigns, think tanks, media outlets and other anti-government efforts through a twice annual meeting of wealthy right-wing donors. He also confided to Moore, who is funded through several of Koch’s ventures, that his true goal is to strengthen the “culture of prosperity” by eliminating “90%” of all laws and government regulations.
Although it is difficult to quantify the exact amount Koch alone has funneled to right-wing fronts, some studies have pointed toward $50 million he has given alone to anti-environmental groups. Recently, fronts funded by Charles and his brother David have received scrutiny because they have played a pivotal role in the organizing of the anti-Obama Tea Parties and the promotion of virulent far right lawmakers like Sen. Jim DeMint (R-SC). (David Koch praised DeMint and gave him a “Washington Award” shortly after the senator promised to “break” Obama by making health reform his “Waterloo.”)
In this must-read cross post, TP’s Lee Fang details how Big Oil and the leading funders of anti-science disinformation are trying to buy a pollution-friendly government.

While the Koch brothers “” each worth over $21.5 billion “” have certainly underwritten much of the right, their hidden coordination with other big business money has gone largely unnoticed. ThinkProgress has obtained a memo outlining the details of the last Koch gathering held in June of this year. The memo, along with an attendee list of about 210 people, shows the titans of industry “” from health insurance companies, oil executives, Wall Street investors, and real estate tycoons “” working together with conservative journalists and Republican operatives to plan the 2010 election, as well as ongoing conservative efforts through 2012. According to the memo, David Chavern, the number two at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and Fox News hate-talker Glenn Beck also met with these representatives of the corporate elite. In an election season with the most undisclosed secret corporate giving since the Watergate-era, the memo sheds light on the symbiotic relationship between extremely profitable, multi-billion dollar corporations and much of the conservative infrastructure. The memo describes the prospective corporate donors as “investors,” and it makes clear that many of the Republican operatives managing shadowy, undisclosed fronts running attack ads against Democrats were involved in the Koch’s election-planning event:
- Corporate “investors” at the Koch meeting included businesses with a strong profit motive in rolling back President Obama’s enacted reforms. Several companies impacted by health reform, including Allan Hubbard of A & E Industries, a manufacturer of medical devices and Judson Green, a board member of health insurance conglomerate Aon, were present at the meeting. Other businessmen at the meeting, like Omaha Burger King franchiser Mike Simmonds, are owners of fast food stores which have fought efforts to provide health insurance to their employees. Many corporate attendees of the meeting represent the financial industry impacted by Wall Street reform. For instance, attendee Bill Cooper is the CEO of TCF Financial, a corporation involved in the mortgage banking industry. Cooper recently filed a lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of Wall Street reform. Other financial industry players in the meeting hail from firms ranging from Bank of America, JLM Investment, Allied Capital Corp, AMG National Trust, the Blackstone Group and Citadel Investment. Annie Dickerson, a representative of Paul Singer, a powerful hedge fund manager who also gives tens of millions to Republican causes, was present. In addition, Koch Industries itself has a hedge fund and other financial derivative products in its portfolio of interests, which include oil pipelines, coal shipping, asphalt, refineries, consumer goods, timber, ranching, and chemicals.
- Corporate “investors” at the Koch meeting included businesses with a strong profit motive in preventing progressive reforms promised by President Obama. Several executives at the meeting have an incentive to stop Democrats and President Obama from addressing climate change and enacting clean energy reform. The meeting included oil executives from Aspect Energy, Murfin Drilling, Anschutz Company, GeoPark Holdings, Smoky Oil, and several members of Koch’s various subsidiaries. The meeting documents explicitly state that funding efforts to curb “climate change alarmism” were discussed.
- Fred Malek, Karl Rove’s top fundraiser for his $56 million attack ad campaign against Democrats, attended the meeting, along with leaders of other secret attack groups. Heather Higgins, who leads the Independent Women’s Forum, a shadowy group that has spent millions of dollars in attack ads on health reform, attended the meeting. So did Gretchen Hamel, a former Bush flak who now runs an attack ad group called “Public Notice,” which denounces spending programs.
- Participants collaborated with infamous consultants who specialize in generating fake grassroots movements, as well as experts on how corporations should take advantage of Citizens United. One session, about how to “mobilize citizens for November,” involved a discussion with Republican strategists Tim Phillips and Sean Noble, anti-union leader Mark Mix, and longtime Koch operative Karl Crow. Phillips “” a veteran astroturf lobbyist who previously managed a deceptive grassroots lobbying campaign to help the Hong Kong-based Tan family maintain their forced abortion sweatshops in the Mariana Islands “” now leads the day-to-day operations of Americans for Prosperity, the group ThinkProgress first reported to have helped organize many of the initial Tea Party rallies against Obama. Americans for Prosperity, founded and financed by David Koch, has a field team of over 80 campaign staffers spread out around the country, and additionally plans to spend $45 million dollars worth of attack ads against Democrats. Shortly before the planning meeting, Crow authored a campaign finance memo explaining that because of the Citizens United Supreme Court ruling, he advised specifically that the U.S. Chamber of Commerce’s 501(c)(6) and Americans for Prosperity’s 501(c)(4) can “now use general treasury funds to produce communications materials opposing or supporting specific candidates” and corporations can aggressively pressure their employees to vote a certain way.
The memo notes that participants in the 2010 election planning meeting “committed to an unprecedented level of support.”
Interestingly, the Koch meetings are managed by Kevin Gentry, an executive who doubles as a staffer in the Koch Industries lobbying office in Washington and as the key point person who helps deliver Koch charitable foundation grants. As ThinkProgress has documented, Koch Industries has dramatically boosted its own profits by using conservative front groups to manipulate public policy. The fusion between the “intellectual” conservative movement and big businesses opposed to regulations and accountability has a history in America dating back to the New Deal. During the thirties, the Du Pont family and other wealthy interests organized an assortment of “Liberty League” front groups to try to defeat New Deal agenda items and repeal President Roosevelt’s Social Security program. Now, corporations fund groups like the Heritage Foundation and the American Enterprise Institute “” both had representatives at the Koch meeting “” to further their lobbying agenda. The American Enterprise Institute even changed its name from the New Deal-era American Enterprise Association to try to dispel the notion that they were nothing more than a glorified business trade association.
As the memo states, Beck has addressed this regular gathering of conservative corporate executives in previous years. Past Koch meetings have included various Republican lawmakers, including DeMint, and Supreme Court Justices Clarence Thomas and Antonin Scalia as speakers.
After ThinkProgess published its exclusive investigation of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce revealing that the Chamber has been actively fundraising from foreign corporations for its 501(c)(6) account used to run a $75 million attack ad campaign, Chamber lobbyists found common cause with Beck and many of the conservative talking heads. Shortly after our investigation, Beck hosted an on-air fundraiser, asking his audience to give to the Chamber. Casual observers might have been surprised by the Chamber’s swift alliance with Beck (Chamber executives appeared on the Beck radio program and sung Beck’s praises on the Chamber blog), who has compared Obama to Adolf Hitler and called the President a “racist” who has a “deep-seated hatred for white people.” By telling his listeners to give money to the Chamber, Beck, who owns a media company worth more than $32 million dollars and an experimental Mercedes Benz, essentially told his working class viewers to give their wages back to their employers. However, Beck never disclosed his long working history of discussing political strategy with America’s largest corporations. The Koch memo clearly shows that Beck has been collaborating with the Chamber, as well as other titans of industry, for years. In his latest appeal for support to the Chamber’s foreign-funded trade association, which already counts JP Morgan and ExxonMobil as dues-paying members, Beck yesterday told his audience that the Chamber simply “defends the little guy.”
Click below to view a letter inviting corporate executives to attend the next Koch meeting in January, along with a list of the sessions held by Koch for the last meeting in June of 2010. An attendee list of the June, 2010 meeting is attached at the bottom of the document:

CAPAF interns Salvatore Colleluori, Riley Waggaman, and Ben Kaldunski contributed to this post.
Some of the donors at the Koch meeting were longtime Bush fundraisers, like Cintas Corporation CEO Dick Farmer and wholesale executive Art Pope. However, many names appear to be relatively new to conservative movement “investment.” Click below for a listing of the attendees
Name(s)IndustryNotesJack and Rose Marie AndersonFinanceCulver Corp, Rose Marie and Jack R. Anderson Foundation- Financial AdvisorNeil Anderson and Amy Fisher-SmithRuns Rose Marie and Jack R. Anderson FoundationPhil and Nancy AnschutzInvestmentIndustrialist, Owner, Weekly Standard, Examiner newspapersCliff AsnessInvestmentAQR Capital ManagementNate and Lynda BachmanFinanceThe Bachman Group-Financial AdvisorWhitney BallThink TankOwner of a firm that helps corporations give anonymous gifts to front groupsMichael BaroneMediaFox NewsFrank and Kathy BaxterBankingAmbassador Frank E. Baxter is Chairman Emeritus of Jefferies and Company, Inc., a global investment bank focusing on mid-cap companies.Steve and Betty BechtelEngineeringOwns the Bechtel Group (Corporation), Largest engineering company in United StatesGlenn BeckMediaFox NewsBernard and Margaret BlasingameManufacturingPresident and owner of Aqua Dynamics Systems, IncAlan and Lisa BoeckmannOilCEO Fluor CorporationBoysie BollingerShipping/CommerceChairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of Bollinger ShipyardsPatrick and Paula BroeReal EstateFounder and CEO of Denver-based real estate asset management firm, The Broe GroupArthur BrooksThink TankPresident, American Enterprise InstituteDavid and Ann BrownThink TankHeritage FoundationJohn BryanBob and Martha BufordOilC. Robert Buford has been President and owner of Zenith Drilling CorporationTim BuschShelby and Nell BushEnergyVice President, Legal and Administration — Hillwood EnergyTim CarneyMediaPolitical Columnist, Washington ExaminerCharlies and Marla ChandlerDavid ChavernLobbyistExecutive Vice President and COO at the U.S. Chamber of CommerceJohn ChildsInsuranceChairman and CEO of J.W. Childs and AssociatesPaul and Lea CliftonRuns Robert and Marie Hansen Family FoundationSusie CoelhoeMediafounder and CEO of Susie Coelho Enterprises Inc.Bill Cooper and Kristin TollefsonFinance/BankingCEO of TCF FinancialDino and Joan CortopassiJoe CraftCoalJoseph W. Craft III is president, chief executive officer and director of Alliance Resource Partners LPAlex CranbergEnergyAspect Holdings, LLC — ChairmanJeff CrankAmericans For Prosperity / Radio PunditAFP State DirectorKarl CrowPolicy AnalystCapital Research CenterEric Crown and Isabella KingTechnology SalesSell Technology EquipmentKevin CrutchfieldCoalKevin S. Crutchfield serves as Chief Executive Officer of Alpha Coal Sales Co., LLC.Ravenell and Beth CurryJim and Shirley DannenbaumEngineeringMr. Dannenbaum, Chairman of Dannenbaum Engineering CorporationVeronique de RugyThink TankSenior research fellow at the Mercatus CenterRich and Helen DeVosBusinessFounder and CEO of AmwayAnnie DickersonBusinessCBRE analystNed and Nancy DiefenthalJim and Dorothy PattersonOilGulf Stream PetroleumDan and Kellie PetersNon-for ProfitDaniel S. Peters is president of the Ruth and Lovett Peters Foundation in Cincinnati, OhioTom PetrieBankingCo-founder of BofA Merrill Lynch Petrie Divestiture AdvisorsDixon and Carol DollTechnologyCo-Founder and General Partner of DCMKarl and Stevie EllerAdvertisingRon and Kris EricksonRetailRonald A. Erickson is the Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of Directors of Holiday CompaniesMelvyn and Suellen EstrinNatural GasDirector of WGL Holdings INCDick FarmerPeter FarrellBiomedFounder of ResmedJim and Zibbie FerrellFuel OilFerrellgas Partners, L.P. engages in the distribution and sale of propane and related equipment primarily in the United States.Dave FettigNatural GasTank Craft, Duracraft Fuel energyBob FettigNatural GasTank Craft, Duracraft Fuel energySteve FettigNatural GasTank Craft, Duracraft Fuel energyJerry and Nanette FingerBankingManaging Partner, Finger Interests LTDRichard FinkKoch IndustriesDirector of Georgia-Pacific, EVP of Koch IndustriesBudd and Lauri FlorkiewiczManufacturingFoam FabricatorsCharlie and Kaye Lynn FoteFinanceFounder and Chief Executive Officer, Fotec Group LLCRandy and Jean FoutchOilChairman and Chief Executive Officer, Laredo Petroleum, Inc.Foster FriessInvestmentMr. Foster Stephen Friess is the Founder and Chairman of Friess Associates, LLCSteve and Polly FriessJerry and Leah FullinwiderEnergy/PetroleumVice Chairman, Hillwood International Energy, L.P.Richard and Leslie GilliamCoalRichard Gilliam has been President of Cumberland Resources Corporation since 1993.Susan GoreThink TankFounder, Wyoming Liberty GroupOliver and Carolyn Grace Jr.Med and TelecomPresident and chief executive officer of Anderson Group, Inc.,Judson and Joyce GreenEnergy and MedMr. Judson C. Green is the President and Chief Executive Officer of NAVTEQ Corp.Ken and Anne GriffinInvestment BankingFounder and CEO of Citadel Investment GroupGretchen HamelFred and Jane HamiltonOilMr. Frederic C. Hamilton served as the President, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of BHP Petroleum, Hamilton Oil Company and various Hamilton Oil Corporation subsidiaries and affiliatesBob and Mary Sue HawkCommunicationsPresident of Hawk CommunicationsDick and Ethie HaworthRetailHead of Haworth Furniture, Multi-national corporation, 3rd largest corporate furniture company in USRobin and Barbara HayesGovernmentFormer NC CongressmanDan and Carolyn HeardManufacturingExecutive Officer of John H. Carter Co.,Diane HendricksManufacturingHusband of Ken HendricksSteve and Regina HennessyAuto SalesAuto SalesJames and Heather HigginsThink TankIndependent Women’s ForumPaul HillOilPaul J. Hill serves as the Chief Executive Officer and has been President of Harvard Developments Inc. since 1978. Mr. Hill serves as the Chief Executive Officer and President of The Hill Companies.John and Joan HotchkisEducationBoard of Directors for Teach for America UC BerkleyAllan and Kathy HubbardChemicals and ManufacturingFounder and Chief Executive Officer, E & A Industries, Inc.Stan and Karen HubbardCommunicationsExecutive Chairman, Chief Executive Officer and President, Hubbard Broadcasting, Inc.Ethelmae HumphreysThink TankCato InstituteManley and Mary JohnsonPolitical ConsultantMerritt JohnsonGerry and Priscilla O’ShaughnessyOilGerald Eugene O’Shaughnessy Co-founded Geopark Holding Limited in 2002.Michael O’ShaunessyTechnologyPetters Consumer Brands, LLC develops consumer electronics and appliances.Tim O’ShaughnessyMediaHungry Machine, Inc., doing business as LivingSocial.com, is a social discovery and cataloging network.Marshall JohnsonKyle and Kirsten JohnstoneMike and Beth KasserReal EstatePresident, Holualoa IncKen and Randy KendrickEducation/TechnologyChairman, DatatelPhil and Joanna KerpenAdvocacy Group/Think TankVP of Policy, Americans for ProsperityGerry and Kathryn KingenRestauranteurRed Robin, Happy Guests Int’llScott KirkpatrickInvestorTeton CapitalCharles and Liz KochKoch IndustriesChase and Annie KochKoch IndustriesDavid and Julia KochKoch IndustriesElizabeth KochKoch IndustriesBob and Cindy KochKoch IndustriesBob KohlheppManufacturing/ServicesVice Chairman, Cintas Corp.Dennis KuesterBankingRetired CEO of M&I BankAndrew KupersmithConsultantMD, Cardiology ConsultantsAndre LacyInvestmentChairman, Lacy Diversified IndustriesKen and Elaine LangoneRetailInvemed, Home DepotJay and Sally LapeyreServicesLaitram CorpKen and Frayda LevyInvestmentJLM Investment MgmtTom LoveRetailCEO, President, Love’s Country StoresBob LuddyManufacturingPresident, Captive Aire SystemsFred and Marlene MalekInvestment ManagementThayer Capital PartnersElaine MarshallHomemakerPierce MarshallAdministrative ManagementMAROPCOPreston MarshallBill MayerHealth CareMD, Mayer & Cope Family PracticeGlen and Diane MeakemBusiness SolutionsCEO, Freemarkets Inc.Ed MeeseThink TankHeritage FoundationLew and Suzy MeibergenGoods/ServicesPresident, Johnston Enterprises/WG Johnston Grain CoDon and Deede MeyersAttorneySelf EmployedJerry and Caroline MilbankInvestment ManagementCEO/Principal, Milbank Winthrop & Co.Jack and Goldie MillerRetailCEO/President, Quill Corp.Mark MixAdvocacy GroupPresident, National Right to Work CommitteeJoe and Mary MoellerKoch IndustriesVice ChairmanSteve MooreMediamember of the Wall Street Journal editorial boardDavid MurfinEnergyPresident, Murfin Drilling Co.Walter and Suzette NegleyMina NguyenLarry and Polly NicholsEnergyExecutive Chairman, Devon Energy CorpSean NobleFront GroupAmericans for ProsperityTim and Teresa OelkeAdvocacy Group/ConstructionTeresa — State Director of Americans for Prosperity, Tim — Crossland Construction CorpEric O’KeefeFront GroupSam Adams AllianceKurt and Nancy PfotenhauerMediaPresident of MediaSpeak Strategies/former political commentator on Fox News, CNN and MSNBC and former Senior Policy Advisor and National Spokesperson with the 2008 John McCain presidential campaignTim PhillipsAdvocacy Grouppresident, Americans for ProsperityRamesh PonnuruMediaNational Review magazineArt and Kathy PopeGoods/ServicesSenior Exec, Variety WholesalerRuss RobertsAttorneyRoberts, Ashby & ParrishCorbin and Barbara RobertsonEnergyPresident, Quintana Minerals CorpRichard Roder and Karin HsuConstruction ManagementCEO, Cmt-Construction ManagementGary and Kathleen RogersGoodsFormer CEO, Dreyer’s Grand Ice CreamDurk RorieManufacturingUnited Air SpecialistsChris RuferGoods/ManufacturingMorningstar CompanyPeter Schiff and Martha O’BrienInvestorSchiff: Euro Pacific Capital Inc.,Steve and Christine SchwarzmanFinancial ServicesCEO/founder, Blackstone GroupRick and Sherry SharpRetailFormer CEO, Circuit CityMike and Lin SimmondsServicesCEO, Simmonds Restaurant MgmtPeter SmithServicesCEO, Service Group of AmericaDick StrongInvestment ServicesStrong/Corneliuson Capital MgmtMichael SullivanInvestment ServicesCR Intrinsic InvestorsRay and Ladeline ThompsonManufacturingPresident/CEO, SemitoolLynn TiltonInvestment ManagementCEO, Patriarch Partners LLCDave and Melanie TrueOilPartnerSteve TwistConsultantRose & Allyn PR ConsultantsJim and Gayla Von EhrResearch/DevelopmentCEO, Zyvex CorpRick and Debra WallerManufacturingOwner, Rollmeister IncPeter WallisonThink TankFellow, American Enterprise InstituteBill and Sarah WaltonReal EstateAllied Capital CorpLew and Myra WardOilWard Petroleum Corporation owns and operates wells. It engages in oil and gas exploration and production. The company was founded in 1963 and is based in Enid, Oklahoma.Dick WeekleyReal EstateWeekley PropertiesFred and Susie WehbaReal EstateBentley Forbes Real EstateNestor Weigand and Darcy BuehlerReal EstateJP Weigand & Sons Real EstateDick and Mary Beth WeissLife InsuranceWells Fargo, Hawthorne RancesHoward and Rhonda WilkinsInsuranceDiversified InsuranceDon and Sue WillsOilLarry and Lorraine WinnermanReal EstateWin Win EnterprisesJoe WoodfordEarl WrightFinanceAMG Natinal TrustKaren Wright and Tom RastinEnergy/ManufacturingTom Rastin, vice president of marketing and engineering, Ariel Corp — Karen Wright, Ariel CEOCliff and Susan YonceInvestment BankingGoldman SachsFred and Sandra YoungServicesDiversified Search, LLC provides senior-level executive and corporate board search services in the United States and internationally. It provides recruitment services for various organizations in consumer and industrial, education, not-for-profit, arts and culture, financial and professional services, business, healthcare and human services, life sciences, media and entertainment, sports and leisure, energy and utilities, private equity, retail, and technology and communications industries.

Reminder: Medicare Is Cheaper Than Private Insurance
By Igor Volsky
“Growth in hospital revenue from Medicare patients was roughly one-third the rate seen from patients on private health insurance during the past year,” data from Standard & Poor’s concludes. The study did not explore the reason for the disparity, but Medicare’s huge purchasing power and administrative efficiencies likely contributed to the slower growth. “Medicare revenue rose 2.5 percent per patient in the year before June, the slowest rate since S&P; started keeping track in January 2005, the S&P; Healthcare Economic Index showed on Thursday. Revenue for patients on commercial insurance rose 7.48 percent in the year ending in June.” Overall, “health care revenue rose 5.6 percent in the year ending in June, almost 2 percent slower than the prior year.”

Blockchain Technology and the Insurance Industry

What if there was a technological advancement so powerful that it transforms the very way the insurance industry operates?
What if there was a technology which could fundamentally alter the way that the economics, the governance systems and the businesses functions operate in the insurance business and could change the way the entire industry postulates in terms of trade, ownership and trust?
This technology is here, and it’s called the Blockchain. And it’s best known as the force that drives Bitcoin.
Bitcoin has gotten a pretty bad rap over the years for good reason. From the collapse of Mt. Gox and the loss of millions — to being the de facto currency for pedophilia peddlers, drug dealer and gun sellers on Silk Road and the darling of the anarcho-capitalist community — Bitcoin is not doing well in the public eye. Its price has also fluctuated wildly, allowing for insane speculation and, with the majority of Bitcoins being owned by the small group that started promoting it, it ‘s sometimes been compared to a Ponzi scheme.
Vivek Wadhwa writes in the Washington Post that Chinese Bitcoin miners control more than 50 percent of the currency-creation capacity and are connected to the rest of the Bitcoin ecosystem through the Great Firewall of China which slows down the entire system because it is the equivalent of a bad hotel WiFi connection. And it also gives the People’s Army a strategic vantage point over a global currency.
Consequently the Bitcoin brand has been decimated and is thought by too many to be a kind of ‘dodgy currency’ on the Internet for ‘dodgy people’.
Therefore the Blockchain, which is a core technology behind what drives Bitcoin, has been slow to enter the Zeitgeist due to being attached to Bitcoin, the bête noire of the ‘establishment’.
But that is changing fast. Blockchain as a tool for disintermediation is simply too powerful to ignore.
People are now beginning to really look at the Blockchain as an infrastructure for more than monetary transactions and what it has done for Bitcoin. Just as Bitcoin makes certain financial intermediaries unnecessary, new innovations on the Blockchain remove the need for gatekeepers from some processes, which can really grease the wheels of any business, including insurance companies.
How Blockchain works and can work for insurance industry
Because of the way it distributes consensus, the Blockchain routes around many of the challenges that typically arise with distributed forms of organisation and issues such as how to cooperate, scale and collectively invest in shared resources and infrastructures.
In the Blockchain, all transactions are logged including information on the date, time, participants as well as the amount of every single transaction in an immutable record.
Each trust agent in the network owns a full copy of the Blockchain and in the case of a private consortium Blockchain (more relevant to the insurance industry), the transactions are verified using advanced cryptographic algorithms and the ‘Genesis Block’ sits within the control of the consortium.
The mathematical principles also ensure that these trust agents automatically and continuously agree about the current state of the Blockchain and every transaction in it. If anyone attempts to corrupt a transaction, the trust agents will not arrive at a consensus and therefore will refuse to incorporate the transaction in the Blockchain.
Imagine there’s a notary present at each transaction. This way, everyone has access to a shared single source of truth. This is why we can always trust the Blockchain.
Imagine a healthcare insurance policy that can only be used to pay for healthcare at certified parties. In this case, whether someone actually follows the rules is no longer verified in the bureaucratic process afterwards. You simply program these rules into the Blockchain. Compliancy in advance.
Automisation through the use of smart contracts also leads to a considerable decrease in bureaucracy, which can save accountants, controllers, and insurance organizations in general, an incredible amount of time.
While the global bankers are far out of the blocks when it comes to learning, understanding and now embracing Blockchain technology, the insurance industry is lagging behind.
There are some efforts to tap innovation as the Financial Times in the UK recently covered with European insurers such as Axa, Aviva and Allianz, along with MassMutual and American Family in the US and Ping An in Asia setting specialist venture capital funds dedicated to investing in start-ups that may be relevant for their core businesses.
But between 2010 and 2015, a mere 13 per cent of innovation investments by insurers were actually in insurance technology companies.
However, Aviva has recently announced a ‘Digital Garage’ in Singapore, a dedicated space where technical specialists, creative designers and commercial teams explore, develop and test new insurance ideas and services which make financial services more tailored and accessible for customers.
And others are sure to follow in the insurance industry. Particularly since both the banking industry and capital markets are bullish on investing in innovation for their own sectors — and particularly since they are doing a lot of investment in and around Blockchain.
The bankers and capital markets are miles ahead of the insurance industry when it comes to investing in Blockchain research and startups.
That needs to change.
Competitors in the capital markets and banking industries in terms of Blockchain solutions include the Open Ledger Project backed by Accenture, ANZ Bank, Cisco, CLS, Credits, Deutsche Börse, Digital Asset Holdings, DTCC, Fujitsu Limited, IC3, IBM, Intel, J.P. Morgan, London Stock Exchange Group, Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group (MUFG), R3, State Street, SWIFT, VMware and Wells Fargo and the R3 Blockchain Group, whose members include the likes of Barclays, BBVA, Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Credit Suisse, Goldman Sachs, J.P. Morgan, Royal Bank of Scotland, State Street, and UBS.
Then there are startups like Ripple and Digital Asset Holdings, the startup led by ex-JPMorgan exec Blythe Masters who turned down a job as head of Barclays’ investment bank to build her Blockchain solution for banking.
There are others in the startup world moving even faster in the same direction, some actually operating in the market such as Billoncash in Poland which is the world’s first Blockchain cryptocash backed by fiat currency and passed through the harsh EU and national regulatory systems with flying colours. Tunisia is replacing its current digital currency eDinar with a Blockchain solution via a Swiss startup called Monetas.
There are both threats and opportunities for the bankers… so what about the global insurance industry?
Every insurance company’s core computer system is, at heart, a big, fat centralised transaction ledger and if the insurance industry does not begin to learn about, evaluate, build with and eventually embrace Blockchain technology, they will leave themselves naked and open to the next Uber, Netflix, AirBnB or wanna’ be Unicorn that comes along and disrupts the space completely.
Blockchain more-than-deserves to be evaluated by insurers, as a potential replacement for today’s central database model.
Where should the Insurance industry start?
They need to start to experiment, like the bankers and stock markets, by not only working with existing Blockchain technologies out there but by beginning to experiment within their own organisations. They need to work with Blockchain-focused accelerators and incubators like outlierventures.io in Europe or Digital Currency Group in the US and tap into the latest startups and technologies. They need to think about running Hackathons and start to build developer communities — to start thinking about crowdsourcing innovation rather than trying to do everything in-house.
Apple, Google, Facebook and Twitter have hundreds of thousands of innovators creating products for them on spec for them via their massive developer communities. Insurance companies that don’t start lowering their walls might very well find themselves unable to innovate as quickly as emerging companies that embrace more open models in the future and therefore, find themselves moot. Kodak meet Instagram.
The first step for insurance companies with Blockchain technology will likely be to look at smart contracts followed by looking for identity validation and building new structural mechanisms where parties no longer need to know or trust each other to participate in exchanges of value.
Blockchain technology, for instance, can also allow for accident or health records to be stored and recorded in a decentralised way which can open the door for insurance companies to reduce friction in the current systems in which they operate.
Currently the industry is highly centralised and the introduction of new Blockchain-fueled structures such as mutual insurance and peer-to-peer models based on the Blockchain could fundamentally affect the status quo.
Blockchain’s immutability by using advanced cryptography can stimulate the insurance industry to create new insurance products.
What is stamped into a Blockchain cannot be reversed or altered.
Or as comedian and writer Dominic Frisby once penned, “The revolution will not be televised. It will be cryptographically time stamped on the Blockchain.”
Some of the many questions that the industry should explore.
What kind of effect will Blockchain technology adoption in markets have on the the public’s perception of risk?
Today the insurance industry is centralised, but what could it look like if it were decentralised?
How could that affect how insurance companies currently mutualise?
Can the Blockchain improve customer relations and confidence?
Can smart contracts built on the Blockchain automate parts of the process in how business is done in the insurance industry?
If you want to explore further, feel free to sign up to express an interest here at our upcoming event in London, Chain Summit Blockchain Event for Insurance companies.
Originally published at www.the-blockchain.com on January 19, 2016.

We Partnered with Hiscox to Make Insurance & Financing Easy
Editor’s Note: This post was originally published on Fundera.com. By Jared Hecht

As part of Fundera’s ongoing mission to make small business lending more transparent, I’m excited to announce today a partnership with Hiscox, America’s #1 online small business insurer.
With this partnership, small business owners will gain access to Fundera’s simple and transparent online application that helps small businesses shop and compare loan offers. Plus, they’ll get our free credit score monitoring and tools to help entrepreneurs better manage their finances.
The process of finding a small business loan is difficult — and many business owners don’t know where to start. That’s why we’re thrilled to partner with Hiscox, who shares our passion for making small business lending simpler, quicker, and more transparent for America’s small businesses. We’re excited to work with Hiscox to help entrepreneurs find the best loans for their business.
The partnership is part of a larger initiative by Hiscox to create a dedicated Small Business Resource Center on its site. Hiscox will offer crucial resources to business owners searching for capital, including expert articles and toolkits to aid the loan search and application processes. Other trusted partners that will be featured on the site include Incorporate.com, an online platform that will help a business become a legally recognized company status, such as a limited liability company or corporation; Licenselogix, which streamlines business licensing service that helps businesses become licensed and compliant with the law by taking over the research, assembly, and filing processes; Magisto, a service that assists businesses in creating professional-looking videos with custom branding, styles, captions and commercially licensed music; and Square, the credit card payment processing company that offers its merchants a full point of sale to track inventory, do real-time reporting and invoicing, and more.
As Kevin Kerridge, Executive Vice President of Small Business Insurance at Hiscox USA said, “The companies we are partnering with all share a commitment and passion for serving small business owners. Our Small Business Resource Center will allow us to expand the resources we have available to our small business customers beyond their insurance needs.”
We’re looking forward to working with Hiscox to better serve the small business community.
Originally published at www.fundera.com on September 28, 2016.

The insurance example is unfortunate. Look at countries with universal healthcare like Australia in comparison.
There are almost no metrics to compare the two where the US “free market” system is better for society as a whole.

Exactly. The big insurance companies had a major role in drafting Obamacare and I’m sure they had a major role in this healthcare bill. They do not spend hundreds of millions per year on lobbying for nothing. They get bang for their buck.

Woman Who Was Denied Insurance Due To Pre-Existing Condition Looking To Get Married For Health Care
By Zaid Jilani

One of the worst abuses of the private insurance industry is its practice of excluding people with certain pre-existing conditions from coverage, effectively denying them the right to get adequate health care coverage because covering them is not profitable enough.
45-year-old mother and divorcee Terri Carlson knows what life is like with a pre-existing condition. She has a rare genetic disease called C4 Complement Deficiency, that involves the immune system having “inadequate levels of complement proteins,” which leaves the body more prone to infections. “[It] makes me unable to process bacteria and viruses efficiently and my body attacks itself. It’s very similar to lupus,” Carlson explained to the press.
Because she recently divorced, she has “one year left under COBRA health coverage, but after that she will have nothing to pay for numerous doctors appointments and dozens of medications.” Due to the fact that Complement Deficiency is considered a pre-existing condition by many health insurance companies, Carlson has been unable to find anyone willing to cover her following the expiration of her COBRA coverage. “I’ve looked, I’ve searched, there is absolutely no stone that I’ve left unturned. And there are no other options for me,” she told a reporter.
After fruitlessly searching for months for a way to get health coverage, Carlson decided that she had only one way to get affordable coverage: She would get married. She has set up a website called WillMarryForHealthInsurance.com and is offering to marry someone whose health insurance will cover her as well. “You know, I am not happy I was delt this deck of cards in my life. However, if I don’t fight for myself nobody will. While the goverment fights over healthcare reform people like me suffer … as drastic as it sounds, I will marry for health insurance,” she writes on the site.
CBS News interviewed Carlson today. She told the news network that she can’t afford to care what her future husband looks like — “The lower the co-pay, the sexier you are to me!” Watch it:
Carlson told CBS that some people have accused her of being part of a left-wing conspiracy by using her case to illustrate the need for health reform, but that she doesn’t mind the charge: “I’m just like every other middle American that’s suffering with a pre-existing condition and caught in the middle. And if that makes me the poster child for President Obama, I’m happy to do it.”
It is worth noting that the United States is the only developed country without a universal, cradle-to-the-grave health care system. In no other developed country would a woman feel like she was forced to marry someone, even if she didn’t love them, just to be able to get decent health care coverage.

Republican Congressman Says Hospitals Should Be Allowed To Turn Away Patients Who Don’t Have Insurance
By Scott Keyes

CONWAY, New Hampshire — Finding bipartisan agreement on any policy is a rarity these days, but lawmakers from both sides of the aisle have supported treating people who show up in the hospital, regardless of their ability to pay. Now, one Tea Party congressman is taking issue with that requirement.
Giving literal meaning to his state’s “Live Free Or Die” motto, Rep. Frank Guinta (R-NH) was asked at a debate Thursday about a hypothetical 25-year-old who needs treatment in the emergency room but doesn’t have health insurance. Guinta’s said he opposed the requirement that hospitals should have to treat people who come in without insurance. “If you are 25 years old and you are choosing not to purchase insurance with the expectation of trying to get it free from the ER at Memorial,” Guinta said, “that shouldn’t be the case”:
MODERATOR: I’m 25 years old. There’s no mandate for me to purchase insurance. The emergency room at Memorial Hospital by law must treat me when I walk in the door, whether I have any money, whether I have any intent to pay or not, I have to be treated. Isn’t it a good Republican principle to say everybody ought to pay for their own medical insurance if we’re going to require hospitals to treat them? […]
GUINTA: If you guy purchase a good or service, you’re supposed to pay for it. Yes, if you are 25 years old and you are choosing not to purchase insurance with the expectation of trying to get it free from the ER at Memorial, that shouldn’t be the case. But for those people who are in a situation who truly can’t afford health insurance, those are the people that we really want to focus on and figure out how to provide them care.
Watch it (jump at 0:35 due to a brief malfunction with Guinta’s microphone):

The law mandating hospitals that receive Medicare funding to treat emergency room patients dates back to the 1980s, when Ronald Reagan signed the Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act.
The Affordable Care Act will help reduce the free rider problem Guinta describes by requiring everyone to purchase health insurance and providing subsidies to those who can’t afford it.

Former Health Insurance Executive Explains How Companies Pocket Billions Through ‘Rescission’
By Victor Zapanta
NOTE: This is the first installment of our series — Meet Your Insurance Company Executive: An Interview with Wendell Potter.
Yesterday, ThinkProgress talked with Wendell Potter, Cigna Health Care’s former Communication Director, about a common and widespread practice among insurance companies called “rescission.” As the former Cigna executive explains, rescission is the insurance industry practice of finding reasons — even reasons as flimsy as typos on your enrollment form — to cancel your coverage when you get sick. According to Potter, insurance companies are saving billions by rescinding coverage from Americans who purchase individual insurance:
POTTER: If they determine that you might have left out something that they consider pertinent on your application and might have indicated that you would have had some illness or might get an illness down the road, and you’ve been getting treatment and submitting claims to your insurance company, they will go back and look at that application and they will often rescind or cancel your policy even if you’ve been paying your premiums on-time, every month, for years. You will be left holding the bag with the responsibility of paying all of your medical care when insurance companies do this. They’ve been doing it for many years and saving billions of dollars as a result of this.
Watch it:

The Washington Post recently highlighted other examples of rescission:
Woman Lost Her Home Because Coverage Was Canceled For Condition She Didn’t Have. “For Teresa Dietrich, it was fibroids. The Northern California real estate agent was left to pay $19,000 after Blue Cross said she did not disclose a diagnosis of the benign uterine tumors. But Dietrich said the doctor who had written ‘fibroids’ on her medical record never mentioned his suspicions to her. The bills destroyed her credit and cost her her home — and, in a comically cruel twist, the surgery proved the doctor was wrong. ‘They said I had a condition I didn’t even have,’ Dietrich said. ‘And they canceled me.’”
 
Woman Saddled With $25,000 Debt For Not Disclosing Condition She Didn’t Know She Had. “The untimely disappearance of Sally Marrari’s medical coverage goes a long way toward explaining why insurance companies are cast as the villain in the health-care reform drama. ‘They said I never mentioned I had a back problem,’ said Marrari, 52, whose coverage with Blue Cross was abruptly canceled in 2006 after a thyroid disorder, fluid in the heart and lupus were diagnosed. That left the Los Angeles woman with $25,000 in medical bills and the stigma of the company’s claim that she had committed fraud by not listing on a health questionnaire ‘preexisting conditions’ Marrari said she did not know she had.’”
Woman Denied Coverage For Gall Bladder Surgery Because Of Husband’s High Cholesterol. Washington Post: “In a pending case, Blue Shield searched in vain for an inconsistency in the health records of the wife of a dairy farmer after she filed a claim for emergency gallbladder surgery, according to attorneys for the family. Turning to her husband’s questionnaire, the company discovered he had not mentioned his high cholesterol and dropped them both. Blue Shield officials said they would not comment on a pending case.”
Rescission is widespread — an investigation by the House Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations found that three insurance companies alone (WellPoint, UnitedHealth and Assurant) cancelled more than 20,000 policies in the last five years.

Major Insurance Company Announces Large Raises For Lowest-Paid Employees
CREDIT: AP/JESSICA HILL
On Monday, health insurance company Aetna announced that it will increase wages for its lowest-paid workers by as much as a third starting in April.
The increase means that approximately 5,700 employees, or 12 percent of its workforce, will see their base wage increase to $16 an hour. While that represents an 11 percent raise on average, some workers will see a boost as large as 33 percent. The workers will mostly be those in customer service and billing.
The company will also give approximately 7,000 employees access to health benefits next year that should lower their out-of-pocket costs by up to $4,000.
CEO Mark T. Bertolini told the Wall Street Journal that the increase is meant to reduce turnover and lead to higher-performing employees. The company is seeking “a better and more informed work force,” he said, and “I’m willing to make the investment to see whether or not this happens.” The timing of the announcement is partly thanks to increasingly positive economic signs, which could make it more difficult to retain and attract employees “now that there are more places for them to go,” he said.
The company loses about $120 million a year to turnover. The total cost of the wage and benefit changes will be $14 million this year and about $25.5 million next year, and while Bertolini doesn’t necessarily expect them to entirely pay for themselves, the company has projected operating revenue of at least $62 billion this year and operating profit of $2.4 billion.
His bet that the company will see benefits from higher wages is backed up by research. On Tuesday, economists Justin Wolfers and Jan Zilinsky released a new paper reviewing the impact of such a move at major private-sector companies in the U.S. They found that higher wages can increase workers’ productivity and performance, with one study they looked at finding that some companies can “offset more than half of their higher wage costs through improved productivity and lower hiring and turnover costs.” They found “voluminous” evidence that higher wages help attract better job candidates. Higher wages also reduce turnover, which can be costly; enhance customer service; and decrease disciplinary problems.
Other economists have come to the same conclusions. John Schmitt at the Center for Economic and Policy Research found that companies benefit from improved efficiency when they raise wages because employers can push their employees to work harder rather than cut hours to cover the cost. He also found it makes it easier to recruit and retain workers.
There are other ways companies can benefit from higher wages. When low-income people see an increase in pay, they tend to spend it, pumping money into the economy and increasing demand for firms’ goods and services. Those sums can be quite large: The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago found that a $9 federal minimum wage would increase household spending by $28 billion, or 0.2 percent of GDP, while the Economic Policy Institute found that a $10.10 wage would increase wages by $35 billion and boost GDP by about $22 billion.
Other companies are making the same bet that Aetna made. In February of last year, Gap Inc. announced that it would raise its lowest hourly wage to $10 by June of this year. It quickly reaped the rewards, seeing an increase of at least 10 percent in job applications. In June, IKEA announced that it would increase its average minimum wage at U.S. stores to $10.76 an hour. A hospital in Dallas went so far as to give workers a raise with money originally set aside for executive bonuses.

You Might Be Getting Money Back from Your Health Insurance Company
This summer millions of Americans could find a check in the mail from an unexpected source: their health-insurance company.
Consumers and businesses will receive about $1.3 billion by this August from insurance plans that failed to meet a new standard in the 2010 health-care law, according to estimates released Thursday by the independent Kaiser Family Foundation. (That’s assuming the law, or at least the portion of it containing the rule, is upheld by the Supreme Court, which is expected to issue its decision in late June.)
Starting in 2011, The Affordable Care Act (I’m calling it that, and not Obamacare) required health insurance companies to spend at least 80 to 85 percent of health insurance premium dollars on actual medical care, and not on administrative costs, like salaries. This was known as the medical loss ratio, and if insurance companies didn’t do that, they had to start giving their customers rebates for the difference by Aug. 1, 2012. Of course, none of us will see any of this money if the Supreme Court decides to kill certain parts of the health care law because they deem them unconstitutional. In addition, variations in state rules will make it so that 92 percent of individual-plan holders in Texas will be getting rebates, while barely 1 percent of residents in states like Vermont, Rhode Island, and Iowa will see a rebate. Health care! Still complicated! Also, a lot of people don’t have health insurance, so this won’t matter to them anyway.

The only love song ever written about buying insurance
Scenes from Scott Ginsberg’s “Tunnel of Love” Concert Documentary
@Nametagscott Live from Prospect Park, Brooklyn
Tunnel of Love will be presented as a serialized, episodic documentary. The movie’s centerpiece is a live concert, so I’m premiering each song as a stand alone chapter. There are 14 songs in the concert, so the distribution timeline will occur over a period of 14 weeks, from September to December 2014.
Here’s chapter five on how buying insurance inspired me to write a song:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5viK49TWVgo&feature=youtu.be
What’s the color of your intuition?

Major Insurance Company Faces Lawsuit For Allegedly Tricking Customers Into Canceling Their Policies
CREDIT: AP IMAGES
By Sy Mukherjee
A major California insurance company is being sued by two consumers alleging that they were tricked into dropping their health coverage when they could have remained on their preferred plans under Obamacare, the Los Angeles Times reports.
Obamacare allows insurance policies that were issued before the law was signed in 2010 to remain in place as long as they don’t change their benefits in a way that harms consumers, such as by increasing their out-of-pocket costs or dropping benefits. Customers who have these so-called “grandfathered plans” can keep them for however long the insurance company continues to offer it.
For customers who don’t have “grandfathered plans,” things are a little different. Their insurance providers must comply with Obamacare’s more robust benefit requirements. Some companies have been canceling millions of individual policies either in an effort to meet those new requirements, or because they want to change the plans in a way that would make them illegal under the health law. Most customers who shop for new individual policies under Obamacare will be eligible for tax subsidies to help them afford their coverage.
California’s Anthem Blue Cross may have convinced their customers that they fall into the second category — even though they’re actually in the first.
“Blue Cross successfully enticed tens of thousands of its individual policyholders to switch out of their grandfathered health plans and forever lose their protected grandfathered status,” states the lawsuit. “Blue Cross concealed information about the consequences of switching plans and intentionally misled its policyholders to encourage the replacement of grandfathered policies.”
The plaintiffs, Paul Simon, 39, and Catherine Corker, 63, of California say that they are among the customers that Anthem Blue Cross pressured to drop their grandfathered policies in 2011 without giving them all the facts about new Obamacare requirements that could raise the price of their plans in an effort to cut its own costs. Simon and Corker would have preferred to remain on the grandfathered plans permitted by the law, and are now asking the courts to block Anthem from canceling any more policies unless the company allows consumers to switch back into their grandfathered plans.
“This is about an insurance company manipulating the situation and concealing the facts,” said William Shernoff, an attorney for both the plaintiffs, in an interview with the Los Angeles Times. “We are asking the court to give our clients and everybody else in the same situation the option of going back to their grandfathered policies.”
California’s Anthem Blue Cross has regularly come under fire for shoddy business practices. Last year, the company requested a double-digit rate hike on customers’ premiums despite the fact that employers and other health insurers said that only modest adjustments were necessary in order to keep up with health care inflation.

Farmers Told To Buy Insurance If They Don’t Want To Get Sued By Corporations

Every year for the past 13 years, biotechnology giant Monsanto Company has sued about 11 farmers per year for patent infringement of their genetically modified corn and soybean seeds. Many of these farmers have had to pay a settlement to the corporation even when their fields were accidentally contaminated with GM seeds from a neighboring farm. Monsanto simply outspends the defendants, dedicating $10 million a year and 75 staffers for the sole purpose of investigating and prosecuting farmers. Farmers who have sued Monsanto back have been soundly defeated.
Monsanto is likely to continue this winning streak with an assist from the U.S. Department of Agriculture, which released a final report Monday absolving the biotech industry of contamination of non-GM seeds with their products from other fields. The USDA report concludes that organic and other non-GM farmers should simply buy insurance to protect against GMO contamination.
Essentially, Monsanto can sue these farmers all they want for patent infringement, but they are immune to challenges from organic farmers whose products are contaminated by GMOs. As one dissenting committee member commented:
Any farmer/seed grower contaminated will not want to disclose the contamination because they are illegally in possession of a patented material and could be subject to legal action for theft of intellectual property. The committee refused to ever recognize this fact.
The report is just the latest example of the USDA’s cozy relationship with the biotech industry. In fact, the agency has never denied a single application for GM crop approval. Monsanto’s power extends beyond the USDA — also on Monday, the Department of Justice dropped their antitrust investigation into Monsanto’s near monopoly on the nation’s seeds. The stalled Farm Bill in Congress also contains a so-called “Monsanto rider” that would entirely deregulate GM crops and allow Monsanto to basically approve its own product.
There is a slim chance Monsanto’s fortunes could change with a Supreme Court case on this term’s docket. In an unprecedented move, the high court agreed to take on an Indiana farmer’s appeal after he was ordered to pay Monsanto $80,000 for patent infringement. Though the current Supreme Court is quite openly sympathetic to corporate interests, their decision to hear the case at all bodes well for farmers grappling with the agricultural giant all over the country.

Thanks To Obamacare, Nearly 9 In 10 American Adults Now Have Insurance
CREDIT: AP PHOTO/J. DAVID AKE
The national uninsurance rate continues to drop to historic lows under the Affordable Care Act, suggesting that the law is making significant progress in its goal of reducing the number of people going without health care coverage. Now, nearly nine in ten American adults say they have insurance, according to the latest survey from Gallup.
Gallup researchers, who have been tracking this data since 2008, recorded the lowest uninsurance rate yet when they surveyed Americans during the first three months of 2015. The rate of uninsured Americans fell to just under 12 percent — dropping more than five percentage points since the beginning of 2013, right before Obamacare’s major coverage expansion went into effect:
CREDIT: Gallup
“The uninsured rate has dropped sharply since the most significant change to the U.S. healthcare system in the Affordable Care Act — the provision requiring most Americans to carry health insurance — took effect at the beginning of 2014,” Gallup concludes.
The decline in the uninsurance rate that occurred after Obamacare’s first open enrollment period translates to about 3.6 million fewer uninsured adults. The researchers note this shift has most greatly benefited the demographic groups that have historically struggled to access insurance, like low-income people and Hispanic Americans. By this measure, the Affordable Care Act appears to be succeeding in at least one of its primary goals five years after it was first signed into law.
“The Affordable Care Act had three major objectives: increase coverage, slow the rate of increase in costs, and improve health,” Dan Witters, the research director for Gallup’s poll, told the Associated Press. “The first one is clearly a win. Coverage is increasing; there is no question about it.”
However, the gains under Obamacare have been uneven throughout the country. A recent study from the Commonwealth Fund suggests that the people who live in states where political leaders have resisted health reform — refusing to set up their own marketplaces, expand Medicaid, or help ease the enrollment process — are still struggling to access insurance. Because GOP lawmakers have refused to expand Medicaid to additional low-income Americans, millions of the working poor fall into a “coverage gap” that leaves them locked out of Obamacare’s promise of affordable coverage altogether. If every single state agreed to expand Medicaid, the national uninsurance rate would be an estimated two percentage points lower.
Plus, the recent progress toward insuring more Americans may be placed in jeopardy depending on the outcome of a pending Supreme Court challenge against the law. If the justices rule in favor of the plaintiffs in King v. Burwell, the government will no longer be allowed to offer subsidies to help Americans buy insurance in the states with federally-run marketplaces — which could result in skyrocketing premiums and an estimated eight million additional uninsured people.

Romney: ‘We Don’t Have People Who Die Because They Don’t Have Insurance’
By Rebecca Leber

Mitt Romney doubled down on his suggestion that uninsured Americans can find the care they need in emergency rooms, telling The Dispatch that people will always receive the treatment they need, and do not die or suffer because they can not pay for care. He pointed to federal law that requires hospitals to admit emergency patients, repeating his advice that patients rely on the most expensive form of care reserved strictly for emergencies. Romney told the Columbus Dispatch:
“We don’t have a setting across this country where if you don’t have insurance, we just say to you, ‘Tough luck, you’re going to die when you have your heart attack,’ ” he said as he offered more hints as to what he would put in place of “Obamacare,” which he has pledged to repeal.
“No, you go to the hospital, you get treated, you get care, and it’s paid for, either by charity, the government or by the hospital. We don’t have people that become ill, who die in their apartment because they don’t have insurance.”
He pointed out that federal law requires hospitals to treat those without health insurance — although hospital officials frequently say that drives up health-care costs.
Emergency rooms serve as a place of last resort, but 45,000 Americans still die every year because they lack health insurance, or one every 12 minutes. Uninsured adults under age 65 are also at a 40 percent higher death risk. Hospitals may treat patients for emergency medical conditions regardless of legal status or ability to pay, but patients with chronic conditions that don’t require emergency interference are often unable to access needed care.
Romney’s health care proposal would leave 72 million Americans without health insurance and wouldn’t provide all uninsured Americans with a stable source of insurance.

Am I The Only One Troubled By The Growing Omnipotence Of State Farm Insurance People?

It starts innocently enough. A dude gets a free sandwich from seemingly nowhere. On a plate. He hasn’t even asked for a plate but he gets one anyway. Then his pals abduct a housepants’ed neighbor. Well, the viewer might raise an eyebrow but she herself doesn’t seem that bothered by it, this Girl from 4E. She even gives a pleased smile to the gent next to her. I mean, the power to be summoned and transported between apartments of a building must be frightening, but perhaps it leaves you a little giddy too. A sort of teleportation brand of Stockholm Syndrome. Like whoa, I’m euphoric from all that instantaneous movement. Headrush! Which might explain why 4E seems to like the attention. Then a Hot Tub crashes into a Dinner Table. Summoned like the woman and the sandwich, it nonetheless crashes violently, whereas both sandwich and woman landed gently. Do these magic teleportation powers deteriorate over the course of the commercial? Apparently the State Farm people are trafficking in some kind of difficult to master dark magick which is let loose upon our realm by the singing of their “magic jingle.” Do the singers of the so-called “Magic Jingle” lose control over the effects of singing the jingle as the commercial progresses? Who exactly is granting these powers? The State Farm claims inspectors? The Universe? And what on earth are those guys saying at the start of the commercial, anyway?: “…Snatching stuff takes…” Are these guys a room full of scruffy thieves? Should we really be granting wishes to rogue elements?
At this point with the world being pretty much a war-and-death-filled taco, shouldn’t we be using the powers of the Magical State Farm Jingle for a greater good? “Like a Good Neighbor, State Farm is There… With an End to the War in Afghanistan! And to Feed Everyone!”
Why if these powers exist are they being wasted — as they are in this commercial — on turning a hot guy into a sensitive guy into a hot guy with a “Dark Side.”

By the way, that dude doesn’t have a Dark Side. He’s just a terrible person. And do ladies really call each other “dude”? Because I don’t know. I use “dude” way too much. It needs to be banished from all vocabularies except those of cowboys and surfers.
What I’ve been able to glean from the commercials is that the powers of the State Farm “Magic Jingle” include: Teleportation, Reading Minds, Instant Creation of Any Object, Sudden Appearance of Somewhat Famous People. If a Superhero had these powers, they’d be Unstoppable. Superman would be turned instantly into a hot guy. Or Bob Barker would summon a new car on his head. These are worrisome powers that should not be granted to Insurance Companies to dole out willy nilly. Genies are Monsters! Not our friends! They grant our wishes to destroy us! And revel in the ironic payback our deepest desires inflict upon our lives.
But the most disturbing of all the “Magic Jingle” commercials may be the one where Buffaloes Attack! Are the guys in the car eating buffalo burgers and watching buffaloes at the same time? Well, of course buffaloes will react angrily to that! And attack your car! You’re eating their mom! You callous jerks.
So the first singing of the jingle summons the State Farm guy. The second singing makes him all-powerful enough to transport everyone in the car hundreds of miles in a second. Later will they have to sing the jingle to retrieve their car? And turn their Buffalo burger into a live buffalo?
I really do want to believe that State Farm will be there when their customers need them. And not only to make somewhat attractive people supermodel attractive. But really help. Having your car messed up is rough. I’ve never owned a car, and don’t have a driver’s license — I just imagine it’s terrible. I mean, the whole endeavor is terrible. But State Farm has decided to not just give great customer support: now they’re dabbling in the arcane arts. Dangerous business. With complicated consequences for all beings in our dimension. LeBron is not just playing the world’s tiniest violin for his friend, he might as well be playing it for all who are attached to the status quo of our reality.
Insurance commercials are 95% of the ads on TV. It is important that we buy insurance and never switch to another insurance company. I’ve always been uncomfortable with Omniscience and Omnipotence. It’s kind of like trying to imagine Heaven and being like, it’s Forever and Ever? That seems scarier than Death being forever and ever. Like how much golf can one play? Every Day, forever and ever? And will I always have to play with my grandfather, his grandfather, his grandfather, Elvis and Marie Antonette? What limits are there on the powers of the State Farm jingle? At some point will someone sing the jingle and say “With four-foot genitalia!” And there will be a big “Survey Says XXX” buzzer noise and the State Farm insurance lady will be like, “Sorry, we just can’t do that.” And then we will know the outer edges of this awesome power! Be careful out there, America! Don’t get into accidents in your cars. And if you do, be careful what you wish for.
 
 Jim Behrle tweets at @behrle for your possible amusement.

Why Can’t Every Doctor Take Every Insurance?

When I showed up at my doctor’s office in Manhattan on Monday, I was flustered and exhausted; I had already been to deepest Brooklyn and back (the end of the 2,5 line) to take Babygirl to her new pediatrician’s office. We hadn’t wanted to switch but had to because her old pediatrician, who we loved, doesn’t take her current insurance, which is called Health First Child Plus or something, who knows, they’re all combinations of nice-sounding but meaningless abstract words. Red Star Red Sword sounds like a funny name for an insurance company, doesn’t it, but is that any different, really, than Blue Cross Blue Shield? We’re just used to the latter.
I ranted a bit to my doctor, and her eyes flamed with indignation. “It’s ridiculous!” she said. “I would write about it if I were a writer, but I’m not, so you’ll have to, but everyone says the patient’s relationship with the doctor is a key part of health care. When you have to switch doctors just because you switch plans, everyone loses.”
I certainly lost. Though the new people were fine, I missed our old pediatrician, who had been seeing Babygirl since she was days old, knows her well, and is a brisk ten minute walk from our house. Going to a new place — a much larger, busier practice a much greater distance away — made Babygirl squirrelly, and it cost both Ben and me our morning. It required redundancies, like typing old info into a different computer and answering the same questions over and over, and introduced the possibility of errors with each transcription.
Why can’t doctors offices and hospital accept any accredited, official health insurance? That would solve the horrifying “Out of Network” problem. That’s how it works for cars, right? It’s not as if you can get hit by an SUV making a left turn and then find out that oops your insurance somehow doesn’t take theirs. There doesn’t seem to be much rhyme or reason to why our old pediatrician accepts one Obamacare policy but not another, or why the hospital closest to us accepts only these six and not those seven.
Seriously, what’s stopping government from mandating that every health provider must accept every legitimate insurance? Paperwork? Admin fees? Or is there a bigger problem I’m not seeing?

Insurance Companies Preparing For Disaster If The Supreme Court Guts Obamacare
CREDIT: AP PHOTO/CHARLES DHARAPAK
In an early warning of what will happen if the Supreme Court backs a legal attack on the Affordable Care Act, the American Academy of Actuaries sent a letter to Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) Sylvia Burwell on Tuesday asking Burwell’s department to permit insurers to raise premiums if the justices vote to defund much of the law. According to the letter, a decision against Obamacare threatens many insurance companies’ “solvency,” unless those insurers are able to raise premiums in the wake of such a decision. Needless to say, if an insurer becomes insolvent, that endangers its customers’ ability to pay for their health care.
King v. Burwell is the lawsuit seeking to cut off tax credits that enable many people to pay for health insurance in close to three dozen states. Should this lawsuit succeed, millions of Americans will become uninsured and an estimated 9,800 will die every year.
The actuaries’ letter describes what will happen to the insurance industry itself as millions of American families are coping with their sudden inability to afford health care. “If federal premium tax credits are no longer available to eligible enrollees in FFM states, enrollment could decline precipitously,” the letter explains. “Moreover, individuals with high-cost health care needs would be more likely to remain enrolled, while those with low-cost health care needs would be more likely to exit the market.”
Once this cycle begins, it can potentially trigger a death spiral. As healthy people drop their insurance, the insurance companies themselves would no longer have the funds they need to cover their sick customers’ health costs — forcing those insurers to raise premiums even more in order to meet their expenses. Once that happens, however, even more healthy people are likely to drop out of the market. Which will cause premiums to go up again. Which will cause more healthy people to drop their insurance. Which will cause premiums to go up. Such a death spiral could potentially collapse the individual insurance market in many states.
Even in a more optimistic scenario, however, the picture is still rather grim. HHS data shows that the average Obamacare consumer who receives a tax credit would face an immediate 322 percent premium hike if they lost that credit. The shocks to the insurance market, according to a RAND study, would then raise premiums by an additional 47 percent.
The thrust of the actuaries letter extends beyond dark predictions of what could happen if the Supreme Court sides with the plaintiffs in King to ask Secretary Burwell to essentially save many insurers from insolvency. Under existing HHS regulations, “for 2015, premiums are already in place and ACA regulations prohibit mid-year premium changes.” Similarly, health insurers “are required to file their 2016 plan year premiums by May 15,” more than a month before the justices are likely to hand down their decision in King. Thus, under current rules, the insurance industry will not be able to protect itself from an adverse decision from the Supreme Court. According to the letter, this problem raises “solvency concerns” because, in the event of a decision to defund Obamacare, existing “premiums likely would be insufficient to cover claims” by people with significant health expenses.
The May 15 deadline raised by the letter also presents another problem that could arise even if the Supreme Court ultimately decides not to take health care away from millions of Americans. Insurers may be reluctant to sell plans on Affordable Care Act exchanges — or they may sell those plans at elevated prices — because they are fearful of what could happen in King. Burwell, most likely, can mitigate this problem by following the actuaries’ recommendations to give insurance companies more flexibility in the event of an adverse decision from the justices. But King could still generate enough terror within the insurance industry to drive up premiums or keep insurers out of the market — even if the justices ultimately recognize that the law is not on the King plaintiffs’ side.

Renters Insurance, Renewed

This morning, I received a call from Allstate telling me that my renters insurance was expiring, and that I should renew it and increase my coverage.
“How much coverage do I currently have?” I asked.
“It’ll cover $15,000 in personal property.”
I thought about the things in my apartment — the Crate & Barrel couch I bought off Craigslist for $200, the desk I bought for $50 (also off of Craigslist), my laptop, which is probably the most expensive thing I own — and said, “$15,000 should be enough.” I renewed my renters insurance for the year for the grand total of $102 — totally worth it if I get burgled.
Some info about getting renter’s insurance via Logan here.
Photo: State Farm


STUDY: Psychiatrists Are The Least Likely Of All Doctors To Accept Private Insurance
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
By Sy Mukherjee
Americans who want to see a psychiatrist have about a 50–50 shot at being able to use private insurance coverage to help pay for it, according to a new study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) Psychiatry.
The study found that just 55 percent of psychiatrists accepted private health insurance between 2009 and 2010, compared to 90 percent of doctors in other specialties. Psychiatrists also accepted public insurance plans like Medicare (55 percent) and Medicaid (43 percent) at significantly lower rates than other doctors (86 percent and 73 percent, respectively).
Lead study author Dr. Tara Bishop of Weill Cornell Medical College says that the findings underscore one of the reasons that it’s so hard for Americans to get psychiatric care. Over half of all Americans with a mental illness didn’t pursue treatment in 2011 because it was too expensive, according to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).
Although the study didn’t pinpoint the reasons that psychiatrists turn down insurance, American Psychiatric Association (APA) president Dr. Jeffrey Lieberman told Reuters Health that a shortage of available psychiatrists and low reimbursement rates for mental health services are two major contributing factors.
“Many doctors can’t afford to accept insurance because [insurers] don’t pay them for the time,” said Lieberman. “It involves taking more time with the patient and often treating them with psychotherapy.”
Recent regulations issued by the Obama administration will at least address the reimbursement problem. In November, the administration released final rules on implementing the 2008 Wellstone-Domenici Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act that will require all American insurance companies to cover mental health services in the same way they do other types of medical care.
That includes prohibiting insurers from charging co-pays and deductibles for mental health benefits in a more restrictive way than they do for other types of care and barring insurance companies from placing more prohibitive caps on the number of times a patient with a mental illness can go to a doctor, or the number of days they can stay in a hospital, than they do for other treatments.

Mt. Laurel Township offered savings to renew early in Burlington County Joint Insurance Fund
Representatives of the fund say a current offer of $117,000 in savings isn’t guaranteed at the township’s normal renewal at the end of 2017.

Mt. Laurel Township has a few decisions to make regarding its membership in the Burlington County Municipal Joint Insurance Fund.
Representatives from the fund spoke at the Dec. 5 Township Council meeting and offered the township about $117,000 in savings to re-enroll in the fund on Jan. 1, one year earlier than the township’s current renewal date of Jan. 1, 2018.
Membership in the Burlington County JIF works as a shared services agreement between Mt. Laurel and 26 other municipalities in the county. Municipalities pool resources to insure for property, liability and workers compensation coverage.
The $117,000 in savings would be in relation to Mt. Laurel’s annual assessment of slightly more than $1 million.
Paul Forlenza, deputy executive director of the fund, said membership is a three-year commitment, and since those members don’t renew each year, the fund attempts to balance the amount of premiums it loses on an annual basis.
Forlenza said the fund was offering Mt. Laurel the opportunity to re-enroll early as one of the ways to balance its renewals, in turn offering the savings as an incentive.
According to Forlenza, every three years when a fund member is up for renewal, the fund re-evaluates that member by looking at exposures and claims history to determine if that member should be revalued.
Forlenza said the fund actuary recently examined Mt. Laurel a year early and determined the township had performed so well in recent years that it deserved a revaluation.
Should Mt. Laurel chose to wait out its current contract, which is over at the end of 2017, Forlenza said the township would be examined once again, but the fund may or may not offer the township the same amount of savings.
Forlenza noted the fund looks at a six-year ongoing loss ratio to balance good years with bad years, so when the township is examined again next year, Mt. Laurel’s best year of 2010 would drop off that six-year basis.
“That revaluation process may end up with you having greater savings or it may end with you not having greater savings. It’s going to depend on how the 2016 fund year plays out.” Forlenza said.
Councilman Rich Van Noord compared the fund to a ship turning “slowly,” as it relates to municipalities that perform as well as Mt. Laurel has.
Van Noord said although Mt. Laurel took more money from the fund than it paid in during the township’s early years in the fund a decade ago, in the past six years Mt. Laurel made up for those losses.
“There are other JIFs in the state that are clamoring for our business. My opinion is that with $117,000 in savings, I’m not comfortable re-signing for three years,” Van Noord said.
Van Noord said he had also already received information from another, unspecified joint insurance fund offering Mt. Laurel $250,000 in savings if the township were hypothetically able to leave the Burlington County Joint Insurance Fund at the end of 2016.
In response, Forlenza cautioned council to examine the financials of those other joint insurance funds compared to the Burlington County JIF.
No final decision was made at the Dec. 5 meeting. Council has until Dec. 31 to accept the early renewal of the township’s membership in the Burlington County JIF.

The religious alternative to health insurance: Christians paying each other’s medical bills
Die religiöse Alternative zur Krankenversicherung: Christen zahlen gegenseitig für ihre Arztrechnungen
Source: “Health Care” by Colin Dunn is licensed under CC BY 2.0

Also read:
Introducing 5 Minutes a Day
How to practice 5 Minutes a Day
Or listen to a guided meditation by Thomas Hübl

Should You Use Life Insurance to Fund Your Retirement?
Have you thought about using life insurance to fund your retirement? Has your financial advisor — or a life insurance salesman — ever presented this as an option?
If so, you should proceed with caution.
While an array of permanent and whole life insurance policies make it possible to withdraw cash to fund part of your retirement, there are risks involved as well as huge fees to consider.
The financial professional you’re working with may not present it that way. A lot of times, they’ll argue permanent or whole life insurance is the best way to save for retirement and avoid part of your tax bill. They’ll say whole life builds cash value you can withdraw and/or borrow against, and they’ll tout the obvious death benefit that goes along with it.
What they won’t tell you is how big (or small) their commission is, and how much more you might have for retirement if you bought term life insurance and invested heavily instead.
Why Life Insurance is a Terrible Way to Fund Retirement
Life insurance salesman may hate me for saying this, but it’s true: Whole life insurance was never meant to be an investment vehicle, and it’s certainly not the best way for the average family to save for their golden years.
Of course I’m not alone in this assessment. According to financial advisor Josh Brein of Bellevue, Washington, permanent life insurance does indeed allow your money to grow tax-free, then allows you to take the money out tax-free in the form of policy loans or withdrawals. But that benefit may come at a cost, he says, since many whole life policies come with huge fees that are often loaded into the first ten years of the policy.
“This means that if anything happens over the first 10 years that would prevent you from being able to continue to pay your premiums, you’re now out all of the money that you have stashed away in the form of premiums either in a policy lapse or where the policy will eat up all of your cash value just to keep itself alive,” says Brein.
But, it gets worse than that. In addition to huge upfront fees, whole life insurance comes with higher premiums, too.
Fresno, California financial advisor Andrew McFadden says the added expense of whole life insurance might even prevent families from buying enough coverage for their needs. A life insurance salesman starts by telling them whole life is better, so they purchase a policy without giving much thought to the actual death benefit itself.
“As a result, most owners of permanent life insurance are underinsured, because they were sold on the fact that whole life insurance gives you something back, whereas term life does not,” he says.
Further, many whole life insurance policies come with a surrender charge. Let’s say you fund your policy for years only to determine it’s too expensive and you no longer want to keep it up. If you want to get your hands on the cash value of your policy, you’ll need to pay a fee for that. Plus, there are tax consequences for withdrawing your earnings to boot.
How You Should Actually Save for Retirement
Despite what your salesman says, the general consensus reached by myself and most financial advisors is this: Most individuals would be better off with a cheap, term life insurance policy sufficient to cover their family’s needs in the event of their death.
When it comes to saving for retirement, there are a slew of ways to invest that don’t lock your money in an expensive insurance policy or come with ridiculous upfront fees.
For starters, you should focus on investing in and maxing out your work-sponsored 401(k) accounts. Beyond your work-sponsored plan, you can also open and fund a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA. Of course, you’ll also want to build a fully-stocked emergency fund along the way. Beyond those goals, you can also open brokerage account if you’re savvy about investing and ongoing costs.
Buying a term life insurance policy and pouring the rest of your efforts into a smart and comprehensive retirement savings plan is a much smarter way to cover your family in the event of your death and save for retirement — at least, unless you meet a very specific set of criteria.
When Whole Life Insurance Makes Sense
As a few of the financial advisors I spoke to noted, there are a few instances where a whole life insurance policy can help with retirement.
“If you are in the highest tax bracket and you have fully funded all of the available tax-advantaged retirement accounts, you might be a candidate for low-cost permanent life insurance,” says San Diego financial planner and CEO of Define Financial Taylor Schulte.
If having life insurance until the day you die is a goal regardless of cost, then sure, permanent life insurance might also be a good idea.
“Permanent life insurance can also be a good fit as a legacy enhancement strategy where required minimum distributions from an IRA (RMD’s) are diverted into premiums for a cash value or permanent life insurance policy, thus, providing a sometimes large additional death benefit to your retirement or legacy planning,” says financial advisor Brein.
If you don’t fall into one of those categories, however, most advisors would strongly suggest you think long and hard before relying on life insurance as part of your retirement savings strategy. And when in doubt, you should hire a fee-only financial advisor for help.
This post was originally featured on US News.

EXCLUSIVE: Health Insurance Lobby’s Stealth Astroturf Campaign Revealed
By Lee Fang

Earlier this week, the Wall Street Journal reported that AHIP — the multimillion dollar lobbying juggernaut for the health insurance industry — has mobilized 50,000 employees to lobby Congress to defeat the public option. ThinkProgress has learned that AHIP’s grassroots lobbying is being managed by the corporate consulting firm Democracy Data & Communications. DDC has made a name for itself as one of the most effective stealth lobbying firms. Earlier this summer, DDC was caught by reporters using a front group called “Citizens for a Safe Alexandria” to attack the Obama administration for seeking to prosecute Guantanamo Bay prisoners in Alexandria, VA.
According to the server-information hub Domaintools.com, the AHIP grassroots outreach website AHIPAdvocacy.org is hosted on a server owned by DDC. Though DDC conceals the hosting of its other websites using a service called DomainsByProxy, ThinkProgress has obtained a list of the domains hosted on DDC servers. A review of this data shows that DDC maintains the grassroots outreach websites for large health insurance companies, but also for big tobacco and Koch Industries:
— phillipmorrisusaactioncenter.org (Altria)
 — tobaccoissues.com (Altria)
 — kochpac.com (Koch Industries)
 — aetnavotes.com (Aetna)
 — healthactionnetwork.org (WellPoint)
 — humanapartners.com (Humana)
 — ahipadvocacy.org (AHIP)
DDC is a firm that promises “high impact” outreach programs to not only influence the grassroots, but “change attitudes for the long term.” As the Washington Post explains, DDC pays over 500 contract workers to “spend much of their day telephoning people around the country and asking them to sign letters to Congress that press for legislation.” The firm helped orchestrate “grassroots” support for President Bush’s push to privatize Social Security, and helped manage online efforts for the right-wing attack group Freedom’s Watch. DDC is headed by B.R. McConnon, a former associate of Jack Abramoff’s lobbying partners, and a former employee of the Koch-funded astroturf organization known as Citizens for a Sound Economy.
Citizens for a Sound Economy — which has also received funds from private health insurers in the past and played a critical astroturf role in killing reform under Clinton — eventually split, with one wing forming Americans for Prosperity in 2003, and another forming FreedomWorks in 2004. Both organizations, which are still funded by the Koch Industries empire, were instrumental in organizing the anti-Obama tea party protests, and have been spreading misinformation and anger at the current health reform effort. Americans for Prosperity’s anti-health reform front group, Patients United, has hosted speakers comparing the House health reform bill to the Holocaust.
Curiously, DDC servers also host anti-health reform letters from the Chamber of Commerce and Rep. Charles Boustany (R-LA), as well as continual news updates about the reform debate. All three documents are under a subsection titled WellPoint.
Given the stealthy nature of astroturf lobbying firms, it is difficult to discern the extent to which DDC is managing AHIP’s efforts. UnitedHealth, another large insurer, was caught recently using a call center to direct people to a radical tea party anti-health reform protest outside of the offices of Rep. Zach Space (D-OH).
Already, the health insurance industry has flexed its muscle to water down reform. After spending millions on lobbying, advertising, and direct contributions to lawmakers, the Senate Finance Committee made a major concession allowing insurers to reimburse only 65% of medical bills (down from the 76% proposed requirement). And indeed, although AHIP has made grandiose promises of self regulation, many insurers have recently broke promises made by AHIP President Karen Ignagni. On June 16, despite Ignagni’s pledges of commitment, insurance executives from UnitedHealth Group, Assurant, and WellPoint specifically refused to “commit” to ending the controversial practice of rescinding coverage after an applicant files a medical claim.
With DDC’s stealth lobbying assistance, AHIP may well kill the public option too.
Update:
At the Wonk Room, Pat Garofalo reports that DDC also maintains an anti-Employee Free Choice Act website supported by the Independent Women’s Forum (IWF). The IWF, which is running anti-health reform ads, is another Koch Industries-funded front group that for a five year period operated out of the same office as Americans for Prosperity. DDC not only serves the health insurance industry, but plays a vital role for the constellation of Koch front groups.

Here are 3 Impressive Tools for Insurance Brokers
With all the technology out there today, it can be difficult to tell which ones are the most helpful for insurance brokers. Here are our favorite tools that we think are best.

The Scannable™ App

Endless stacks of papers and disorganized documents should be a thing of the past for insurance brokers. However, slow and clunky scanners make it near impossible to efficiently make the transition to the digital world. The same company that created Evernote has released a brand new app made specifically to solve these problems. Scannable™ allows the user to simply scan the documents with a quick, seamless interface and save them directly to Evernote to be organized. This app is a must-have for insurance brokers. Check out Scannable™ at https://evernote.com/products/scannable/.
The TriggerBox for Insurance Brokers
Email is not a good way for insurance brokers to send insurance forms that contain sensitive information, such as your account numbers or social security number. It is not secure enough and can be easily intercepted by identity thieves. A better approach is to upload your documents to a secure document storage platform like TriggerBox, which notifies the recipient via email. Once they get the email, they can download the document securely through TriggerBox. Some people use Dropbox for sharing sensitive documents, but they’re simply not secure enough. For confidential client information, you need to use a service that both encrypts the document when being sent over email and keeps the document encrypted when stored there. The TriggerBox is a low-cost service that allows you to send documents to your client. Your client doesn’t need to have to have a paid license of the TriggerBox to download the documents or send some back. Here is a quick video that shows how it works. You can get a free 30 day trial here.

In an increasingly digital world, it is becoming more and more important to safeguard sensitive information, keep your documents organized, and streamline team efficiency. We hope you find these tools as useful as we do!
Zoho CRM

Now that you’ve got your work space organized, it is also a great idea to organize your workflow. Enter Zoho CRM, a sales force automation software that has revolutionized productivity. Zoho CRM is by far the most efficient way to manage and prioritize tasks for teams. Not only does it keep track of tasks, goals, and clients, it also forecasts revenues based on data stored within the software. This is a leap forward for the productivity of companies with large teams and seemingly endless tasks. You can find out more at their website: https://www.zoho.com/crm.
Know about a useful tool that we missed? Let us know in the comments what you think.
About Us
We hope you enjoy our blog, we share tips about lifestyle improvement, estate planning, travel, technology and organizing your digital life. If you like this post, you may like these as well:
4 Powerful Tools to Keep You Organized
How to Declutter your Digital Life
Delight your Customers with these 3 Powerful Techniques
Follow Us: Twitter | Facebook | Google+ | Subscribe to this blog
Did you like what you read?
Recommend this post (by clicking the ❤ button) so other people can see it and share it on Facebook, Twitter or Google Plus. Thanks for supporting my blog!

3 ‘What If’s’ that Could Make Uber Shifts in Insurance

Disruption. The insurance industry has been knocked around and placed under increasing pressure to reimagine its future. The marketplace has changed — healthcare exchanges are a commonplace and non-traditional, digitally-centric competitors are swooping in to attain all unclaimed and/or underappreciated marketshare. The insurer that can deliver a product and service that consumers want will win.
As we advance into 2016, these three trends offer opportunities to ‘Uber’ize the industry:
#1 Let’s Talk “Friendsurance”
The industry has neglected the next generation of buyers — the millennials.
This year, the millennials became the largest generational group in the U.S. workforce, with more than 75 million living, breathing, insurance-needing members.
This year, the millennials became the largest generational group in the U.S. workforce, with more than 75 million living, breathing, insurance-needing members. The millennials have an entirely different context for what influences their choices. While these new customers are not as affluent as your tenured ones, they’re spending like no one else.
Look no further than Uber, Amazon Prime, AirBNB, Trip Advisor, Google and Facebook, to understand the forces that have shaped this generation. Millennials don’t anticipate their lives to be as prosperous and linear as their parents’ and that’s helping to spur the evolution of the sharing economy. Think of the hospitality industry, where AirBNB has more rooms than any other chain without owning a single property. Think about the financial services space, where micro-financing and crowdfunding are providing access to capital in a way traditional sources never did. And think of transportation and autos, where car sharing in big cities has become a regular way to get around.
What if a peer-to-peer insurance model was devised under which friends and family could pool the their risk and source products from non-traditional sources?
#2 Traverse the Data Divide
‘Big Data’ just keeps getting bigger and bigger. The insurance industry can’t escape the challenges posed by big data such as how to analyze, capture, curate and protect consumer information. Yet, some are taking full advantage of this deluge of data and building the most sophisticated predictive models ever built. The pressure to succeed with big data has created a huge divide — those that find ways to harness it all and those that don’t.
What if Google decided to flex its muscle (again) and turn its vast knowledge of societal trends, personal and geo-specific data to create products that can predict livelihood better than traditional underwriting can?
#3 Exchanges as the New Norm
The web’s been the great enabler of exchange-centered business models that search, find, match, share and recommend tailored products and services. Consumer exchanges have had a profound impact on health insurance (both good and bad). B2B exchanges, for example, have changed the procurement function forever. Creating transparency and giving customers what they want, where and when they want it is the winning solution.
What if there was a LendingTree-style business model for life insurance?
Prophet is expert in bringing new thinking to legacy problems in the Insurance industry. Our work with clients such as American Family Insurance, United Healthcare and Zurich highlights how we anticipate trends like these, develop innovative solutions and build strong value propositions that change how you go to market.
This post was written by Andrew Pierce and originally appeared on Prophet’s blog.

The Cost of Things: Getting The Flu When Your Insurance Sucks
by Isabel Ponte

The first pediatrician I ever saw was called Dr. Trevedi, and she was wonderful. Instead of a white coat, she wore crimson saris accessorized with bejeweled chandelier earrings. Instead of Highlights in the waiting room, she had stacks of comic books. I was what Victorian novels refer to as a sickly child, so I saw Dr. Trevedi a lot. Since then, no other practitioner has compared, which is part of why I now hate going to the doctor.
The other reason I avoid interacting with medical professionals is my insurance and its $5000 deductible. Until I spend that amount, my plan covers absolutely nothing. I think it is legally supposed to pick up the tab for one office visit per year, but that has never happened. So when my boyfriend came down with the flu this winter, all I could see when I looked at him were Major Expenses looming. “Don’t worry, I still love you, even though you’re a cesspool of disease,” I said, edging slowly toward the other side of the bed.
For two weeks, I thought I was in the clear, even though the flu vaccine this year was only 23 percent effective. I developed the kind of immuno-exceptionalism normally found in anti-vaxxers. Maybe being constantly sick as a kid made me hardy!
Thanks to my newfound pioneer attitude, my response to grogginess and an incipient cough was to take two Advil and a bracing three-hour walk through snow-encrusted Prospect Park. Here’s what that cost me:
Urgent Care: $215.99
Even as I got sicker and sicker, I delayed going to the doctor until I could no longer shuffle from my room to the kitchen without taking multiple breaks. This dire moment came the exact day that everything in New York shut down thanks to a theoretical blizzard that never materialized, so urgent care was my only option. Some quick tests revealed I had the flu, plus “complications” in the form of bronchitis and a sinus infection. On the way out of my appointment, the receptionist gave me a free pen, so I guess you can consider part of that expense recouped.
Prescriptions: $87.79
This covered steroids, an inhaler, Flonase, antibiotics and the kind of cough syrup you can’t buy over the counter because it’s too easy to make into meth. When the pharmacist rung me up, she looked at me with pitying eyes. “You mean your insurance doesn’t cover any of this?”
Lost wages: About $480.00
My job, like many jobs in the U.S., doesn’t offer paid sick leave, so this was my biggest expense. Working from home allowed me to resist taking time off for a while, but I had to once I couldn’t lift my head to look at the computer.
Miscellaneous:
Nyquil: $13.99
Advil: $0. Luckily I found a container of ibuprofen the size of a grain silo in my bathroom, which in retrospect was probably expired
Off-brand tissues with the gentle texture of sandpaper: $3.25
Whiskey for my throat: $34.99
Easy-to-digest soups and crackers: about $20
Total expenses: $856.01
Gains: Being trapped in my apartment probably saved me money on restaurants, public transportation and all the other costs associated with being a functioning member of society.
Maybe someday I’ll meet my deductible. I just have to get the flu 16 more times.

How to Get Life Insurance (If You Need It)

Why you need to know this: If you have anyone in your life who will be in deep financial trouble if you die, you should get life insurance.
When I was a freshman in college, I experienced a series of complicated medical issues that startled my parents into asking me to buy a life insurance plan. They were in no position to pay for a funeral if I suddenly died, and reasoned that my life insurance policy would cover all the expenses related to my untimely demise. I was taken aback by the idea that I would die before I was 20, but dutifully researched life insurance plans (because I am a tiger cub, and that’s what tiger cubs do).
It was a scary time (the medical things, the parents telling me that they were worried I was going to die and put them deep into debt, the process of getting approved for coverage even though my doctors were telling me I was going to be fine), but I ended up getting a 20-year-term life insurance policy worth $250,000 with a totally do-able payment of $15 a month. A decade later, I’m now paying about $36 a month for my policy, and if I were to die today, my parents (i.e. my beneficiaries) would receive more than $1 million. My folks are probably coming up with a scheme to kill me now so they can collect a payout. Kidding! (Kidding? Yes, kidding!)
I would have never considered getting a life insurance policy if none of those things had gone down. If you’re young, and relatively unattached you probably don’t need a policy. Because if you’re not married, have children, or have anyone else in your life who would be in deep financial trouble if you died, life insurance isn’t necessary. But if you have do have these people in your life and want to make sure that they’re taken care of if something happened to you, yes, it’s totally sensible to pay a few dollars a month for a life insurance policy.
Term life insurance is recommended: There are different kinds of life insurance policies (i.e. whole life), but financial advisors usually suggest that you get a term policy that covers you for a certain time period. A 20-year term policy is considered the best and advisors will usually tell you to get coverage that’s equal to at least five times your annual salary.
How much it will cost: Term policies are very affordable if you’re in good health. If you’re 30, you can get a 20-year term policy worth $500,000 for about $25 a month. If your health isn’t stellar for whatever reason, or if you smoke, you’re going to have to pay more (like three or four times more), or you may even be denied coverage.
How to get it:
Step One: Go on Insure.com and enter in your personal information (height, weight, birthdate, how much coverage you’d like, and your contact information) to get a free list of price quotes. You can call an agency to get more information, but an agent is usually willing to call you to follow up on your inquiry.
Step Two: Complete an application with the company you’re interested in buying life insurance from.
Step Three: The company will work with you to schedule a medical exam because they want to make sure you didn’t lie about your medical history, and will evaluate your current state of health. The medical examiner will do a basic checkup, and take blood and urine samples.
Step Four: Put in a request for a copy of the medical evaluation results to be sent to you, because you’ll want that for your records, and they might not give it to you if you don’t ask. If you get denied coverage, you’ll want to know why.
Step Five: If you get approved for coverage, great! The price the company offers you shouldn’t be higher than what they quoted you. But if they discovered something during your medical exam that wasn’t made apparent before, they can either reject your application, or offer you a pricier rate.
Step Six: Make your monthly payments, and you’re good to go. You can now walk around saying, “I’m insured for $1 million!” and impress everyone until they realize that’s not actually your net worth.
Photo credit: Flickr/Mads Boedker

Digital Insurance, alla scoperta dell’ecosistema cinese
Per le compagnie Insurtech, la Cina può rivelarsi uno scenario ricco di possibilità oppure una giungla pericolosa: l’analisi delle strategie e delle caratteristiche delle realtà di successo nate e sviluppatesi in quell’ambiente può fornire alcune preziose coordinate.
The Metropolitan Museum of Art, Tang dynasty (618–907), China
Medium: Hollow dry lacquer with traces of gilt and polychrome pigment and gilding
Dimensions: H. 38 in. (96.5 cm); W. 27 in. (68.6 cm); D. 22 1/2 in. (57.1 cm)
Se è vero che lo sbarco nella realtà cinese è ormai sempre più dichiaratamente una delle esigenze più urgenti e sentite da parte di tutti gli attori del mercato globale, ivi compresi quelli del settore assicurativo, è altrettanto indisputabile che si tratti di una sfida ben più complessa e articolata rispetto a quella proposta dallo scenario occidentale.
Mentre infatti in quel caso la digitalizzazione ha accentuato l’omogeneizzazione delle modalità e del linguaggio operativo, così da favorire la creazione di una serie di strategie standardizzate, l’eccezionalità storico-culturale cinese obbliga a uno sforzo di comprensione più complesso per raggiungere l’audience locale: qui, più che altrove, l’aumento del brand awareness e la crescita del tasso di ritenzione dipendono dalla capacità di comunicare e di intercettare le aspettative ed esigenze dei clienti, e le modalità per raggiungere questi risultati non sempre sono congruenti a quelle applicate. Come sempre, allora, lo studio preliminare dell’ambiente diventa non solo utile, ma necessario. L’esempio degli attori autoctoni, infatti, può contribuire a rendere più evidenti i driver che guidano lo sviluppo del mercato e le sue caratteristiche peculiari.
Abbiamo già avuto modo di analizzare uno dei fenomeni più interessanti e in crescita degli ultimi tempi all’interno dello scenario assicurativo cinese, vale a dire il coinvolgimento delle piattaforme di mobile chatting,
WeChat, la via cinese all’Insurtech marketing
Le strategie di marketing e client loyalizing passano oggi per vie fino a pochi anni fa ritenuti impensabili: a…blog.bhuman.it
in particolare quella attuata dal gruppo Taikang Life insurance, che utilizza il servizio WeChat per lo sviluppo di un gifting scheme che permette di regalare ai propri contatti una polizza assicurativa sanitaria attivabile in caso di una diagnosi di tumore maligno. Come giustamente fa notare Michael O’Dwyer nel suo articolo pubblicato all’interno del sito The Digital Insurer, l’efficacia contingente dell’iniziativa può essere collegata anche all’ambiente culturale in cui viene proposta e all’attitudine derivata dal retaggio confuciano che esorta alla reciprocità e alla generosità (secondo i principi dello “shu” e dello “shi”).
eBaoTech — A team of over 1,000 people focused on insurance technology
Un altro elemento da tenere in attenta considerazione quando si approccia il mercato cinese è l’impulso sempre più forte e condizionante alla digitalizzazione, una spinta che viene sicuramente accolta e fatta propria dalla base della clientela ma che è diretta dall’alto, dai colossi regionali della telematizzazione. Si tratta dunque di un trend alimentato che deve essere considerato prioritario indipendentemente dalle considerazioni soggettive sull’attuale incidenza del mezzo telematico sulle dinamiche del mercato assicurativo generale. L’esempio forse più eclatante è rappresentato dalla partnership tra Alibaba e la società di servizi informatici eBaoTech per il lancio di quella che è stata presentata come “la prima piattaforma cloud in ambito assicurativo”, eBao Cloud , alla quale agenti e agenzie si possono rivolgere senza la necessità di sviluppare un sistema proprietario.
La prima compagnia a accedere ai servizi di eBao Cloud è stata ZhongAn, che non gestisce alcuna risorsa “fisica” e non possiede una rete di agenti.

Il business di ZhongAn si regge su bassi costi di funzionamento e di distribuzione. L’uso di BigData che supportano un corretto pricing di prodotto e il controllo dei rischi.
Un terzo elemento di analisi è quello squisitamente culturale, e nel caso di una realtà così vasta e per certi versi elusiva come la Cina può rivelarsi quello in grado di caratterizzare in maniera mirata l’offerta commerciale da proporre in quell’ambito regionale. A tale conclusione sembra essere già arrivata Allianz, che insieme a Taobao (anch’essa appartenente alla galassia di Alibaba) ha ideato una polizza “full-moon”, che propone ai suoi clienti un risarcimento nel caso risulti impossibile ammirare la luna piena durante il tradizionale Festival di Metà Autunno, una ricorrenza molto sentita.
Ancora più promettente e potenzialmente incidente nelle dinamiche assicurative nel medio-lungo periodo è l’iniziativa di ZhongAn di aprire una branca, la ZhongAn Technology, che tra i suoi obiettivi ha, per dirlo con le parole di Xing Jiang, CEO della compagnia, quello di “sviluppare un nuovo ecosistema all’interno dell’ambito FinTech,” progettando applicazioni di tipo Blockchain per rendere la gestione dei database assicurativi più efficiente e sicura e l’espletamento delle pratiche più rapido, per un livello di customer satisfaction più elevato: uno standard al quale, ragionevolmente, chiunque voglia fare il proprio ingresso nel mercato cinese dovrà adeguarsi.
Il nostro osservatorio Cina prosegue. Continuate a seguirci!
Aggiungi un 💚 a questa storia, così anche altri lettori potranno leggerla. Grazie! Seguici anche su Twitter e Facebook
Visita www.bhuman.it e Iscriviti alla newsletter, ti invieremo gli aggiornamenti sulle novità di settore.

The pending change in the personal lines (more specifically car) insurance industry is very true as we enter an era where we become “asset-lite.”
I think the shift will occur at a lag to autonomous fleets coming online. Once this happens, it will be interesting to see 1) who the premium paying party is, and subsequently 2) what types of products will protect us in a HaaS environment.
Some questions/thoughts: Will the service providers need to get commercial liability? If so, what will pricing be like? Presumably, the auto insurance market will fold into the commercial liability market (ie: shift in the pie, not growth). If the consumer is responsible, what type of product will be released? If anything, it should be more aligned to the value of the insured party given that could be underwritten in real time based on experience data from fleets, adjusted for environmental factors, passenger/payload characteristics, among other things

States That Opt Out Of Medicaid Expansion Will Drive Up Private Insurance Premiums
By Jeff Spross

The cost-benefit analysis of the Republican governors opting out of the Medicaid expansion under the health care reform law has always been questionable. Although foregoing the Medicaid expansion allows governors to avoid a slight burden on their state budgets — one that will be modest even under pessimistic predictions — it also means failing to provide as many as 17 million currently uninsured Americans with health care coverage.
Wonkblog’s Sarah Kliff flagged a brief that brings up yet another factor for governors to consider when weighing the Medicaid expansion. By some estimates, opting out could drive premiums up 2 percent or higher for Americans covered by private insurers:
Using CBO data, the brief estimates that those higher health-care costs will be 2 percent higher than “projections made under the assumption that all states do expand Medicaid.” Those premium increases would be borne by both the federal government, which helps buy coverage for subsidized individuals, as well as the individual purchasers themselves.
The expansion of the Medicaid program would expand eligibility to everyone up to 138 percent of the federal poverty line (FPL). Until now, eligibility has maxed out at 100 percent of the poverty line. At the same time, the health insurance exchanges created by Obamacare will cover anyone from 100 to 400 percent of the FPL who isn’t already covered through either Medicaid or their employer. So in any state that opts out of the Medicaid expansion, those in the 100 to 138 percent range will wind up on the exchanges instead of in the Medicaid program. According to the CBO’s logic, these individuals will likely have more expensive health care needs in comparison to the rest of the population in the exchanges, which in turn will drive up premiums. Because all these markets are intertwined — providers that work with Medicaid also work with private insurers, and private insurers that offer plans on the exchanges will offer them outside the exchanges as well — this premium increase will occur in both opt-out and opt-in states, and for consumers both in and out of the exchanges.
As Kliff’s analysis demonstrates, the Republican governors who are resisting the Obamacare Medicaid expansion aren’t just impacting the low-income residents in their own states who could benefit from increased access to health insurance. In fact, opting out of the Medicaid expansion could have consequences that spill over into other states across the country.

Americans Who Battle Cancer Are Twice As Likely To Go Bankrupt, Even If They Have Health Insurance

Cancer patients are much more likely to go bankrupt than Americans who aren’t faced with a cancer diagnosis, a new study finds. Even the Americans who have access to health insurance aren’t necessarily safe from bankruptcy, since the high cost of treating cancer can still put an untenable strain their finances.
A team of researchers in Washington state collected data from nearly 400,000 adults, evenly split between those who had been treated for cancer and those who were cancer-free. After checking to see which of those adults had filed for bankruptcy between 1995 and 2009, the researchers found that cancer patients were 2.5 times as likely to go bankrupt in that period.
Although the study didn’t specifically look at insurance coverage, previous research has demonstrated that the Americans who cite major health issues as the reason they filed for bankruptcy are actually often insured. One 2006 study found that more than 60 percent of bankruptcies in the United States are due to high medical bills, and in those cases, three-quarters of those Americans had insurance when they got sick. NBC News interviewed one cancer patient who found herself in this situation, even though she was employed and insured when she first got her diagnosis:
That rings true for Janet Literski, 57, who had purchased health insurance as an independent contractor working in sales. When she was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma in 2008 Literski discovered her insurance covered only part of her surgical costs and none of her diagnostic tests. Then there were co-payments and deductibles. By the time she was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer two years later, she was about $150,000 in medical debt.
In 2011, no longer able to work, Literski and her disabled husband filed for bankruptcy. “It was a gut wrenching decision because you feel like a personal failure, and that makes me angry because I had tried to do everything right,” Literski says. “I had health insurance, I was working.”
Literski is now covered by Medicaid and receives disability payments and though she hasn’t been told she’s in remission, she says she is “healthy enough.”
[The study’s lead author, Dr. Scott Ramsey,] says cancer centers need to do a better job of assessing each patient’s financial status, offering credit counseling, and managing patient care.
Even bigger disparities emerged when the researchers broke down the cancer patients in their study by different demographics. The younger groups were up to 10 times more likely to go broke than the older patients, and non-white women were the most likely to run out of money.The cancer that is associated with the highest risk of bankruptcy is thyroid cancer — likely because that disease mostly affects younger women. On the other hand, older men with prostate cancer are the least likely to reach financial rock bottom.
Ramsey and his researchers first presented their research in 2011, and their final findings were published in the Health Affairs journal this week. The timing of the study’s release coincides with some recent pressure to help lower the cost of cancer drugs. Last month, a group of over 100 doctors criticized Big Pharma companies for making “life-saving” cancer drugs too expensive for Americans to afford. The doctors asserted that the “unsustainable drug prices” were “causing harm to patients,” and urged reforms in this area to ensure that cancer patients don’t have to go without the treatment they need.
Cancer patients have also been recently caught up in the budget battles resulting from sequestration. At the end of April, cancer clinics blasted Congress for taking legislative action to restore the sequester cuts that were causing airport delays rather than working to address the cuts that are undermining Americans’ chemotherapy treatment. As a result of the automatic budget cuts, some Americans are being forced to delay their chemotherapy, and some cancer clinics may even be forced to close their doors.

America’s Unemployment Insurance Is Less Generous Than Other Industrialized Countries
By Travis Waldron

Critics of the United States’ unemployment insurance program often claim that the program is too generous, and that it fosters a culture of laziness that inspires workers to stay home on the couch collecting benefits instead of searching for jobs.
This chart from The Atlantic’s Matthew O’Brien shows that the United States actually has one of the least generous unemployment insurance programs in the wealthy industrialized world. The chart, generated by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development’s benefits calculator, assumes that the unemployed were making their nation’s average salary before they lost their jobs:

As O’Brien points out, the chart also proves the “culture of laziness” critique of the unemployment insurance program wrong, since there is very little correlation between generous unemployment insurance programs and high unemployment rates. Greece, for instance, has one of the least generous unemployment programs, but it has higher unemployment than nearly every country included. Israel is among the most generous, and its unemployment rate declined rapidly after peaking early in the recession. Spain ranks in the middle and has a higher unemployment rate than any country on the chart.
Worse, though, is the fact that America’s federal unemployment insurance program has gotten less robust since 2007, and it could soon face bigger reductions if not outright expiration. Two million people will lose benefits at the end of the year if the program isn’t extended during debt negotiations, and another million would lose benefits early in 2013. More than a half-million have already lost benefits because of the way the federal program calculates them and because eligibility was reduced when the program was extended earlier this year.

Annual Census Bureau Report Shows Tremendous Progress in Health Insurance Coverage but Little Change in Poverty
By Dan Lesser
The U.S. Census Bureau’s three reports relating to annual income and poverty were released last week, and they present a decidedly mixed bag of progress toward ending poverty in the United States.
Health Insurance
The data show a dramatic drop in the number of Americans who lack health insurance in 2014, the first year that all of the policy provisions of the Affordable Care Act took full effect. In fact, the number of uninsured Americans dropped to its lowest rate since the Census Bureau began measuring it in 1987. Nearly nine million Americans gained health insurance, and the uninsured rate fell 2.9% from 13.3% in 2013 to 10.4% in 2014. While racial and sex disparities in coverage persist, the rate of uninsured Blacks fell from 15.9% in 2013 to 11.8% in 2014, and from 17% to 13% for working-age women, indicating significant but incomplete progress.
Official Poverty Measure
Despite these gains in health insurance coverage, the report showed no significant decline in the poverty rate. Nearly 47 million Americans lived below the poverty line in 2014. That’s 14.8% of us, including 21.5% of all children. This marks the fourth year in a row in which poverty rates have failed to decline significantly. As it stands, poor people, in particular poor children, have been left behind in the recovery from the Great Recession. This stagnation in progress reducing poverty is unacceptable.
More than one in every five children is growing up in poverty in the United States. Moreover, large, enduring racial inequalities persist; Hispanic children are two-and-a-half times more likely to live in poverty than white children ,and Black children are three times more likely. Aside from being a moral disgrace, childhood poverty has a high economic cost. Lost productivity, extra health and criminal justice costs, and other consequences of childhood poverty are estimated to cost the U.S. economy close to $500 billion per year, or 3.8% of our Gross Domestic Product.
Like racial equality, gender equality remains elusive. Women are more likely than men to be poor, with 14.7 percent of women in poverty compared to 10.9 percent of men. Even more shocking, 39.8% of all female heads of households are in poverty, making a clear case for stronger investments in programs that help lift women and their children out of poverty. The gender wage gap has changed little since 2007: Women working full time earned 79 cents for every dollar earned by their male counterparts.. This gap is even starker for women of color, with black and Hispanic women earning 60 cents and 55 cents, respectively, to every dollar earned by white men.
Supplemental Poverty Measure
This year, for the first time, in addition to releasing data measured against the Official Poverty Measure (OPM), the Census Bureau also released a report on the Supplemental Poverty Measure at the same time. The OPM, which is used to determine eligibility for government benefits and transfers, measures only an individual’s or family’s resources based on their gross before-tax cash income. The SPM is a far more accurate measure of a family’s wealth, and includes income from non-cash benefits like nutritional assistance (such as SNAP or WIC), subsidized housing (like Section 8 Vouchers), home energy assistance (like LIHEAP) and tax credits (like the EITC or CTC) and subtracts expenses including income and social security taxes, childcare or work-related expenses, and out-of-pocket medical care and health insurance costs. Because it accounts for these resources, the SPM offers a far more nuanced and realistic picture of who is living in poverty and the important role that these assistance programs play in alleviating poverty.
To be clear, noncash benefits and tax credits are by no means silver bullets, but they clearly improve the lives of some of our most vulnerable people. For example, the rate of children living in deep poverty (below 50% of the poverty threshold) during 2014 was 5.4% lower measured under the SPM than under the OPM (4.3% instead of 9.7%). The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) alone decreased the 2014 child poverty rate by 3.2%, while refundable tax credits, such as the Child Tax Credit and the Earned Income Tax Credit, cut child poverty rates by 7.1%. These statistics show that anti-poverty programs provide some measure of relief to many low-income households.
Amidst a political environment that often seeks to stigmatize, denigrate, and ultimately weaken safety net programs, the 2014 U.S. Census Poverty Data should galvanize those of us committed to ending poverty. As a strong starting point, we should urge Congress , when taking up tax reform later this year, to make permanent certain key improvements, for low-income workers, in the Earned Income Tax Credit and Child Tax Credit that otherwise are likely to expire at the end of 2017. These tax credits are instrumental to keeping a large number of people above the poverty threshold; according to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, 16 million individuals, including 8 million children, will either be thrust into or fall deeper into poverty in 2018 if the EITC and CTC expire.
The 2014 Census data show that, although progress in eliminating poverty may be stalled, strong policy measures do make a substantial difference. We know what works to advance justice and opportunity for low-income people and communities. Now is the time to make strong investments in proven policy measures to ensure the best possible present and future for all Americans.
Originally published at www.theshriverbrief.org on September 21, 2015.

How to Implement a Self-Funded Health Insurance Plan
Are you looking to take control of your company’s health strategy in the coming year? We teamed up with One Medical Group to give you a simple five step guide to self-insurance.
Here’s what you’ll find:
Why self-funded plans make sense for companies of almost any size: 95% of large companies have adopted self-funded plans for their flexibility and cost savings — now you can too.
Step-by-step guidance for implementing a self-funded plan: Understand what’s involved in developing a self-funded plan and how to design one that’s right for your company.
New services and technologies that support self-funded plans: Learn how companies like One Medical and Collective Health can help you increase the success of your plan.
Download our whitepaper now

78 Percent Of Bankruptcy Filers Burdened By Healthcare Expenses Had Health Insurance
By Igor Volsky

In an update to their landmark 2001 study on medical bankruptcy, researchers at Harvard University have concluded that medical debt contributed to 62 percent of U.S. personal bankruptcies in 2007–78 percent of bankruptcy filers burdened by healthcare expenses had health insurance but “still were overwhelmed by their medical debt”:
For 92% of the medically bankrupt, high medical bills directly contributed to their bankruptcy. Many families with continuous coverage found themselves under-insured, responsible for thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket costs. Others had private coverage but lost it when they became too sick to work. Nationally, a quarter of firms cancel coverage immediately when an employee suffers a disabling illness; another quarter do so within a year. Income loss due to illness also was common, but nearly always coupled with high medical bills.
“The proportion of all bankruptcies attributable to medical problems has increased by 50%” since 2001, and is likely to grow even higher once the economic climate of 2008 is considered. Nationally, the percentage of Americans “under the age of 65 with employer sponsored insurance declined to less than 63 percent in 2007, from more than 67 percent in 1999,” and employers are now reporting that they plan to shift more health costs to employees.
Earlier this week, a new study published in Health Affairs concluded that “the 161 million Americans with employer-sponsored health insurance are facing substantial increases in out-of-pocket (OOP) costs.” In 2007, “adults with employer coverage faced an average of $729 annually in OOP costs for medical services,” a “34 percent increase from 2004. In fact, between 2000 and 2006, premiums for family coverage grew 6.4 times more quickly than workers’ earnings and average worker’s share of family health insurance premiums nearly doubled from 2000 to 2007.
All this is to say that health care reform isn’t just about extending insurance to the uninsured — it’s also about shoring up inadequate coverage. In other words, personal financial security requires health care reform — affordable, adequate, accessible coverage for all Americans. Health reformers must assure Americans with insurance that reform will secure their access to coverage and protect Americans and their families from a medical or financial catastrophe. After all, this study demonstrates that too many insured Americans are just one illness away from bankruptcy.
[READ THE FULL REPORT HERE.]

Rising Health Costs, Not Obamacare, Are Increasing Insurance Rates In Connecticut

As Republicans remain hostile to Obamacare — GOP lawmakers have already wasted $50 million on dozens of failed attempts to repeal the law, and House Republicans have even threatened to shut down the government in order to block health care reform’s implementation — they often complain that Obamacare will translate into soaring costs for the health care industry. It’s true that health insurance rates are rising, but data from Connecticut suggests it has nothing to do with Obamacare.
Filings from Connecticut’s two largest health insurers, which both applied for double-digit rate increases this year, show that the insurance companies are not driving up their prices because Obamacare is leading them to do so. Rather, the rate increases are due to increasingly expensive health costs that are unaffected by the implementation of the health care law:
But the overwhelming reason for the rate increase requests is rising medical costs, the filings by Anthem, Aetna and ConnectiCare say. The companies say this is mainly because providers are raising their prices and patients are getting more care.
“People are accessing more services and hospitals, doctors and labs are charging us more,” Aetna spokeswoman Susan Millerick said.
The costs associated with the Affordable Care Act account for only a tiny fraction of the requested increases — less than 1 percent. These amounts cover the costs of the preventative women’s care benefits and the changes in cost sharing, said Paul Lombardo, the actuary for the state Insurance Department who reviews the rate increase requests.
While health care spending did rise at double the rate of inflation in 2010, a report by the Health Care Cost Institute confirms Connecticut’s findings and concludes the rising prices are due to the health costs that crept up during the recession. In fact, Obamacare will help address this very issue. The health care reform law represents part of the solution — not the problem, as Republicans claim — as it seeks to help make health insurance more affordable by reforming payment models, reducing payments to hospitals, and prioritizing quality of care.

This guy looks unimpressed. I’ll bet he is on the phone to an insurance company.
Why is it so painful to buy insurance?
I purchased a new item and wanted to add it to my contents policy. But I’ve been unhappy with my insurer in the past, so I also shopped around to see if I could get a better deal with another insurer. As you do. (As I do, anyway.)
On a friend’s recommendation, I visited the Youi website and started a quote. I wasn’t too happy about entering so many personal details at the first step…and I was even less happy when the next screen said that a consultant was phoning me right now. And, sure enough, my phone started ringing.
Now, one thing I know about myself is that I am not capable of processing information presented to me as pictures or sound. But, more than that, I don’t process things linearly. So when I’m buying insurance I like to flick back and forth between multiple insurers and policies and their exclusions and costs and get a feel for what my options are.
So this guy calls me up and starts asking me questions about my quote.
‘I just wanted an online quote, so I could compare it to other insurers,’ I told him.
‘We customise your quote to meet your circumstances, so you don’t pay for anything you don’t need.’
‘Okay, I get that, but I just need general contents insurance. There’s nothing special. I need all the usual things and I just want to compare.’
‘It’s just some questions, and it means when you claim we won’t have to ask you any questions because we have all the details.’
He then commences on the questions other insurers also record: when was the building constructed? What materials are used for the walls, roof, floors, fence? Do you have deadlocks? Do you have security screens? Do you have accessible windows? Do your accessible windows have locks?
I’m not sure why we have to do this on the phone. We’ve already been chatting ten minutes and I could’ve done it faster online, where I can read multiple options at a glance and not have to listen to someone say them all out loud before I can pick one.
I mean, one of my pet hates is those videos that spoon-feed me information that I could’ve consumed in moments if it had been presented as text. And, speaking of pets…
‘Do you have a pet? Do you want to insure your pet on your contents policy?’
‘Well, that depends,’ I reply. ‘She’s currently covered by a policy I’m happy with. So I’d need to read your PDS, see what’s covered and what the exclusions are, and find out how much it costs me to add it to my policy, before I decide.’
See, that’s how I do this insurance thing. I pick a few insurers, and I flick back and forth and select different options and compare the PDSs side-by-side and determine which is the best value for me.
‘Ohhhhhh-kay. I’ll put it in for now, and then we can take it out to compare, and that will answer your questions.’
Well, sort of. But you’re still not giving me the exclusions, are you, buddy?
So I persisted. For an hour. An hour during which he couldn’t answer my questions. An hour during which I had to explain to him how specified effects work and then discovered the minimum amount of jewellery and personal items I could insure was $2500. (I have nowhere near that much jewellery. I see no point in bling.)
And then, when he told me it’d cost me $89 a month—way more than my current insurer—and asked me for my banking details, still without explaining the exclusions, I lost my shit.
‘Hey, look, this whole process has been really unpleasant for me. It is very slow. I like to read things, and understand them. I still don’t know what’s covered and what’s not. I don’t know how much each addition is contributing to my total cost. I don’t know whether I’m paying more for the things I do need, just so I don’t have to pay for things I don’t need. Maybe someone else will insure all those extra things at no extra charge — I don’t know, because I can’t see a breakdown.’
‘Okay, ma’am, but…’
‘I know you’ve tried very hard to help me, thank you, but I really need you to just email me the quote, and the PDS, and give me some time to read over it and actually understand what you are selling me.’
‘Okay, ma’am, but…’
And then I removed myself from the conversation, called up my current contents insurer, and added the item. It took five minutes, and cost me $89 (bringing the total to well under what the Youi was going to charge), and the consultant was very friendly and helpful and even checked over my car policy. ‘Is your car still under finance? Let us know as soon as it’s not, because that will change your premium.’
Le sigh.
There’s an hour I could’ve spent much more wisely.
But, wait! There’s more!
When I ranted about this, a friend said I’d probably done well to not go with Youi. (Thanks, Ben.) Here’s why:
Does Youi owe you? Insurer accused of billing without consent
Sheng* couldn't understand why the Youi sales representative kept him on the phone for an hour, peppering him with…www.smh.com.au
BREAKING NEWS: Insurer Youi under under ASIC investigation
Accusations of dodgy sales tactics and defrauding customers have been levelled against Youi in Australia, mirroring…www.insurancebusinessonline.com.au
Youi in watchdog's sights
QUEENSLAND-based insurance outfit Youi could be in hot water with the industry watchdog in Australia following…www.couriermail.com.au
First half hour - 19th August, 2016. New Zealand YOUI investigation uncovers Aussie victims
If you're thinking about insuring your car, or home, you may have considered Youi. The South African Insurance company…blogs.abc.net.au

STUDY: Medicaid Beneficiaries Are Just As Happy With Their Coverage As Americans With Private Insurance
By Sy Mukherjee

A new study from the Government Accountability Office (GAO) finds that since 2008, state efforts to reform Medicaid and make the low-income safety net program more efficient — likely spurred by provisions in the Children’s Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act (CHIPRA) and Obamacare — have resulted in lower application processing times and high beneficiary coverage satisfaction comparable to private health insurance.
The study also found that the main hurdle to ensuring beneficiary satisfaction was the shortage of caregivers who accept Medicaid patients, mainly due to low payment rates for the doctors who take on Medicaid patients. As the GAO summarizes:
States reported making numerous changes to provider payments, provider taxes, and beneficiary services since 2008. While more states reported provider-rate and supplemental payment increases each year from 2008 through 2011, the number reporting payment reductions and increased provider taxes also grew. More states reported increasing services than limiting them.
Over two-thirds of states reported challenges to ensuring enough Medicaid providers to serve beneficiaries — including dental and specialty care providers. States cited Medicaid payment rates and a general shortage of providers as adding to the challenge. To attract new providers, over half the states reported simplifying administrative requirements or increasing payment rates.
In calendar years 2008 and 2009, less than 4 percent of beneficiaries who had Medicaid coverage for a full year reported difficulty obtaining medical care, which was similar to individuals with full-year private insurance; however, more Medicaid beneficiaries reported difficulty obtaining dental care than those with private insurance.
CHIPRA and Obamacare both expand the Medicaid program by vastly increasing the program’s funding, encouraging more aggressive enrollment efforts in the states, and rewarding states that successfully expand their coverage pool by insuring the poorest Americans.
The fact that Medicaid beneficiaries are self-reporting satisfaction with their coverage at the same rates as private insurance subscribers suggests that the program is working well — at least in states where it is well-funded. Safety net programs tend to enjoy high levels of satisfaction in general, with Medicare beating out private insurance with a 92 percent approval rating. Medicaid could be on the road to that same level of success if it’s adequately funded. But that would likely happen only if Republican governors decide to accept the federal government’s extremely generous funding to implement Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion.

When Good Health Insurance Doesn’t Do You Any Good
(Photo: KOMU PHOTOS/ Eric Staszczak)
Ben-Tzion Welton, a Chabad rabbi, has devoted much of his life to public service in the San Francisco Bay Area, where he and his wife Sharona raised four children. He has worked as an advocate for the disabled and, more recently, founded and headed a Berkeley-based non-profit organization known as Sunrise Kosher, a Bay Area kosher certification agency.
Two years ago, he was a middle-class Californian with good health insurance that he thought would help him in time of need.
Then he got really sick.
Now 64, Welton had serious digestive problems that were difficult to diagnose. He saw specialists and underwent an operation to remove an obstruction. He incurred thousands of dollars in medical expenses that weren’t covered by his Kaiser Permanente insurance policy, including out-of-network costs and home health-care related costs. His income suffered because he was unable to work as much.
An estimated one in five American adults were contacted by a debt collector about medical bills in 2014, including nearly 6.15 million Californians.
The rabbi was part of a surprising national statistic: The majority of people who incur medical debts have health insurance.
“I felt like it wasn’t right,” his son, Levi Welton, tells Capital & Main. “My father worked hard. He paid his taxes and he had [health] insurance. This is a clear story of how you can have good insurance, but it really doesn’t do you any good.”
The elder Welton’s situation is hardly unique, particularly among working- and middle-class Californians. The Golden State had the highest number of bankruptcies due to medical bills, with 248,002 bankruptcies in a single year, according to a study published by NerdWallet Health, a personal finance site. Medical debt was the leading cause of bankruptcy among Americans, and approximately 1.7 million people nationwide filed for bankruptcy in 2013 due to medical bills.
The Affordable Care Act and an expansion of California’s Medicaid program (known as Medi-Cal) have improved access to health care for millions of previously uninsured Californians, particularly low-income residents. But it hasn’t solved the serious problem of medical debt — which often results in bankruptcy — that affects people like Rabbi Welton, even when they have good insurance.
(Photo: Rabbi Ben-Tzion Welton)
“It’s absolutely not just poor people,” says Andrew Fitch, an analyst for NerdWallet. “It’s really affecting middle-class Americans.”
Fitch rattles off recent statistics to prove his point: An estimated one in five American adults were contacted by a debt collector about medical bills in 2014, including nearly 6.15 million Californians. In 2013 state residents paid up to $1.75 billion in medical debt to third-party collectors.
“While the chances of falling into medical debt are greater for people who are uninsured, most people who experience difficulty paying medical bills have health insurance,” states a 2014 report by the Kaiser Family Foundation titled “Medical Debt Among People with Health Insurance.” (The foundation is not connected with Kaiser Permanente.)
The Kaiser report examined nearly two dozen cases of people nationwide who faced serious medical debt. It found that the problems affected people of all ages, and with annual incomes ranging from $10,000 a year to more than $100,000. Most of the case studies focused on people who struggled with medical debt while covered under employer-sponsored health plans that would be considered typical and mainstream.
Among insured individuals, the study found, unaffordable medical debts resulted primarily from cost-sharing for care not covered by insurance. This includes deductibles and co-pays, which can total thousands of dollars a year. Out-of-network costs also were burdensome, and many people inadvertently received non-network care while hospitalized.
Medical debt was the leading cause of bankruptcy among Americans, and approximately 1.7 million people nationwide filed for bankruptcy in 2013 due to medical bills.
Stephanie Woolhandler is a public health professor at the City University of New York at Hunter College, and an advocate of a single-payer health system. She says that while the Affordable Care Act has provided access to health care for many people who were previously uninsured, it has, for some others, also accelerated the trend toward higher deductibles, co-pays, and gaps in insurance by putting a government approval on skimpier insurance coverage overall.
As a result of the higher deductibles and gaps, Woolhandler cautions, “we’re likely to see more bankruptcies,” among middle-class and working people.
“When you go from a system you used to have — a private insurance with a good safety net — to a system with very high co-pays and deductibles and big gaps, you are creating more inequality,” Woolhandler adds. “The health system becomes a way of increasing inequality instead of a way of equalizing things between rich and poor.”
The consequences of medical debt are serious, says Karen Pollitz, an author of the report from the Kaiser Family Foundation, where she is a senior fellow. “People forego care, they get behind on other bills, all the way to losing their home, depleting their savings or even declaring bankruptcy,” she says. “Bankruptcy is the end of the line.”
So far, Rabbi Welton has been able to avoid that dire consequence — at least partly with the help of an online crowd-funding organization known as GiveForward, which specializes in helping people with unexpected medical bills.
Levi Welton says the idea of turning to an online funding site came to him by chance.
“I was watching Breaking Bad and there was a scene with a crowdfunding website,” he says, recalling that his father was initially reluctant. The rabbi has insisted that part of any money raised should go toward paying a health advocate to help others navigate the health care system. So far, 234 donors have given a total of $27,207 to help Welton, according to the site.
Overall, GiveForward has helped families raise more than $150 million since 2008 to help cover medical expenses, out-of-pocket costs, and other unanticipated expenses.
“It’s acts like this,” says Levi Welton, “that remind me that even in times of great darkness, light will always shine.”
This post originally appeared on Capital & Main, a Pacific Standard partner site, as “Navigating the Serious Cracks in Health Care Coverage.” It is part of a month-long series exploring how economic inequality is transforming California, and what can be done to rebuild our vanishing middle class.

Maine’s High-Risk Insurance Pool Has 14 People In It
By Igor Volsky
The Affordable Care Act’s high risk insurance pools — which serve as a bridge of coverage for individuals with pre-existing conditions until the exchanges are established in 2014 — have had a hard time attracting beneficiaries across the country, but Maine’s program is truly struggling. According to the Portland Press Herald, “only 14 people have subscribed to the plan.”

Why Obamacare’s Insurance Marketplaces Won’t Implode Next Year
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
By Sy Mukherjee
Worried that Healthcare.gov’s botched rollout — and ongoing problems with some states’ Obamacare web portals — could wreak havoc on enrollment efforts and create an unsustainable insurance marketplace that has too few young, healthy enrollees? Don’t be.
Two new reports by the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF) and the Urban Institute/Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF) find that Obamacare can survive lower-than-expected enrollment numbers in its first year, and that premiums won’t necessarily skyrocket even if just a small number of young and healthy Americans get coverage this year.
Insurers in the pre-Obamacare market regularly charged sick people more for their coverage. That practice of medical “underwriting” is prohibited under the Affordable Care Act, which allows insurance companies to base their premiums on just three variables — a consumer’s geographic location, age, and whether or not they smoke. Age is largely used as a stand-in for health status, since younger people are also generally healthier. And in order to keep marketplace premiums in check and stop insurers from cherry-picking their customers, the health law only allows companies to charge older people up to three times the amount they charge younger people.
That’s why the White House and KFF has projected that, in order to keep the marketplaces stable, about 40 percent of the expected seven million people who will enroll in private Obamacare coverage in 2014 must be relatively young and healthy. Otherwise, the insurance pools might be filled with a disproportionate number of sicker and older people — known as “adverse selection” — who are in greater need of health coverage but more expensive for insurers to cover, forcing companies to aggressively hike premiums across the board. That would then further discourage younger people from enrolling in coverage and lead to a vicious cycle that policy experts refer to as the insurance “death spiral.”
However, “because premiums are still allowed to vary substantially based on age, the financial consequences of lower enrollment among young adults are not as great as conventional wisdom might suggest,” explain the authors of KFF’s new report.
KFF found that if just one-third of a marketplace’s enrollees are between the ages of 18 and 34, insurers’ total costs “would be about 1.1% higher than premium revenues.” Strikingly, even a 50 percent lower-than-expected enrollment rate among young people — considered a worst-case scenario — would result in costs just 2.4 percent higher than revenues.
“[E]ven in the worst case, insurers would still be expected to earn profits, and would then likely raise premiums in 2015 to make up the shortfall,” concluded the authors. But the required premium increase would likely be limited to one or two percent, “well below the level that would trigger a ‘death spiral.’”
RWJF’s new study points to several other reasons that insurers are unlikely to hike rates even if enrollment skews toward sicker and older Americans. For instance, “risk corridors” — an Obamacare mechanism meant to limit how much insurers can profit or lose in the marketplaces — lets the government take money from insurance companies that set their 2014 premiums too high and use it to stem losses for companies that ended up setting their rates too low. Several other provisions will also limit insurer losses and consequently reduce the need for higher premiums.
The study authors also say that young people will be encouraged to sign up — if not in 2014, then during the next enrollment period — because of the way that Obamacare’s subsidies are structured. Since younger people tend to make less money, they’ll have access to more robust financial assistance under the health law. In fact, between 65 and 70 percent of 18 to 35-year-olds are expected to qualify for Obamacare subsidies. The youngest Obamacare enrollees are also far more likely to fall in an income bracket (less than 1.5 times the poverty level) where their out-of-pocket expenses are further limited under the law.
Thus, neither low enrollment numbers nor potentially sicker and costlier risk pools “is likely to affect the long term viability of the reforms or to substantially affect the nongroup premiums faced by consumers in future years,” concluded the researchers.

Weiner Offends The GOP On House Floor: You’re All ‘Owned’ By The ‘Insurance Industry’!
By Zaid Jilani
Today, the House of Representatives debated the Health Insurance Industry Fair Competition Act, legislation that would repeal the 65 year exemption health insurance companies have from anti-trust regulations.
Speaking on the House floor this afternoon, Rep. Anthony Weiner (D-NY) lambasted Republicans for being “a wholly owned subsidiary of an insurance industry,” prompting an offended Rep. Dan Lungren (R-CA) to lodge a complaint:
WEINER: You guys have chutzpah. The Republican Party is the wholly owned subsidiary of the insurance industry. They say this isn’t going to do enough, but when we propose an alternative to provide competition, they’re against it. They say we want to strengthen state insurance commissioners and they’ll do the job. But when we did that in our national health care bill, they said we’re against it. They said we want to have competition but when we proposed requiring competition they’re against it. They’re a wholly owned subsidiary of the insurance industry. That’s the fact!
LUNGREN: Mr. Speaker I ask that the gentleman’s words be taken down.
WEINER: You really don’t want to go there, Mr. Lungren.
A minute later, Weiner returned to the floor and withdrew his words, and then substituted them by clarifying, “Make no mistake about it, every single Republican I have ever met in my entire life is a wholly owned subsidiary of the insurance industry!”
Lungren once again immediately demanded that Weiner’s words be taken down. Weiner once more finally returned to the floor to withdraw his words, and ended his statement by saying that he has had “enough of the phoniness. We are gonna solve this problem because for years our Republican friends have been unable to and unwilling to. Deal with it!” His colleagues applauded his remarks. Watch it:

At the end of the debate, the House voted 406–19 to repeal the insurers’ long-held exemption from anti-trust laws.
Transcript:
WEINER: You guys have chutzpah. The Republican Party is the wholly owned subsidiary of the insurance industry. They say this isn’t going to do enough, but when we propose an alternative to provide competition, they’re against it. They say we want to strengthen state insurance commissioners and they’ll do the job. But when we did that in our national health care bill, they said we’re against it. They said we want to have competition but when we proposed requiring competition they’re against it. They’re a wholly owned subsidiary of the insurance industry. That’s the fact!
LUNGREN: Mr. Speaker I ask that the gentleman’s words be taken down.
WEINER: You really don’t want to go there, Mr. Lungren. […] Make no mistake about it. Every single Republican I have ever met in my entire life is wholly owned subsidiary of the insurance industry. That is why —
LUNGREN: Mr. Speaker I ask that the gentleman’s words be taken down once more.
WEINER: Look, the point is very simple, there are inequities in the present way we distribute insurance. There are winners and there are losers. The winners are the insurance industry. […] There is not bipartisanship on this particular issue. The people who sit on this side, at the risk of offending anyone, generally support the idea of standing up for the American people in their battle against big insurance. And the people generally speaking who sit on this side of the chamber and specifically speaking as well in a lot of cases, simply won’t permit that to happen and haven’t for a generation. Well, that is going to end now. […] Enough of the phonyness. We are gonna solve this problem because for years our Republican friends have been unable to and unwilling to. Deal with it!” (applause)
Update:
The roll call of the vote is now up. GOP Reps. Akin (MO), Boehner (OH), Brady (TX), Broun (GA), Buyer (IN), Franks (AZ), Garrett (NJ), Jenkins, Jordan (OH), King (IA), Lamborn (CO), Linder (GA), Moran (KS), Paul (TX), Price (GA), Ryan (WI), Sensenbrenner (WI), Tiahrt (KS), and Westmoreland (GA) voted against.

@AccentureTech: “#IoT is expanding insurance offerings beyond indemnification to real-time risk protection:”

Accenture’s global study reveals a continued push toward digital insurance distribution read more

After Fighting Against Public Option, Blue Dog Policy Director To Lobby For Health Insurance Industry
By Igor Volsky

Throughout the health care reform debate, Congressional Blue Dogs lobbied then-House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) to adopt provisions that would lower health care spending and reduce the deficit, but curiously opposed the so-called robust public option. That measure reimbursed providers 5 to 10 percent above Medicare rates and would have reduced the deficit by as much as $110 billion over 10 years. In July of 2009, the fifty-member Blue Dog Coalition wrote a letter to Pelosi revealing “strong reservations” about an earlier House version of the health care bill. “After reviewing the draft tri-committee health care reform proposal, we believe it lacks a number of elements essential to preserving what works and fixing what is broken,” they wrote, noting:
A “Medicare-like” public option would negatively impact hospitals, doctors and patients…using Medicare’s below-market rates would seriously weaken the financial stability of our local hospitals and doctors.”
That argument was debunked repeatedly by MedPAC — which argued that Medicare rates are adequate and consistent with the efficient delivery of services — and relied heavily on insurance industry talking points. The industry feared that it would lose market share if forced to compete against a more efficient public plan. In March 2009, he industry’s chief lobbying arm, AHIP, provided lawmakers with this presentation, ‘What you should say when asked about the public option”:
You could end up not being able to see the doctor of your choice as the government plan would reimburse doctors so little for their services they stop accepting or dropping patients by the government plans.
And so, given all this, it is perhaps not surprising that today’s Politico Pulse reports that Erik Komendant, the policy director for the Blue Dog Coalition, has now accepted a job at AHIP as “VP for federal affairs.” After all, it’s like he was working for them already.

New Illinois Law Mandates Catastrophic Insurance Coverage For High School Athletes
CREDIT: CHICAGO TRIBUNE
By Travis Waldron
Illinois Gov. Pat Quinn (D) signed a law Monday that will require all high schools in the state to provide athletes with catastrophic injury coverage in the event of a major injury. The law, dubbed “Rocky’s Law,” was inspired by and is named for Rasul “Rocky” Clark, who was paralyzed during a football game in 2000.
Clark, who died in 2007, received medical care under a $5 million policy the school had taken out, but until now, those policies weren’t mandatory. The coverage will cost schools about $5 per athlete, according to estimates, but it will provide major benefits to injured athletes, the Associated Press explained:
The coverage will require a small fee from students but will provide major coverage benefits to injured athletes, the Associated Press explained:
The law says that a school’s minimum policy will cover $3 million in aggregate benefits or five years of coverage — whatever comes first — for injuries that total medical expenses over $50,000. The law includes public and private schools and state officials estimate that the cost of the coverage will be no more than $5 a student. Currently, some schools carry insurance for athletes, but it hasn’t been mandatory. The Illinois High School Association provides students with this catastrophic insurance for state tournaments.
State Sen. Napoleon Harris (D), a former NFL player, sponsored the legislation. “These students’ lives are dramatically changed in cases of catastrophic injuries, and they deserve access to health care coverage,” Harris told the AP.
In 2012, there were nearly 7.7 million Americans playing high school sports; the Illinois law, which applies to both private and public schools, will cover nearly 350,000 athletes, according to the state’s latest participation figures. Injuries like Clark’s are most common in football, where about 1 of every 100,000 high school players suffers a serious spinal cord injury. Nearly 50,000 Illinoisans and more than 1 million Americans play high school football each year.

Should We Update Our Disability Insurance Program?
by Zachary Morris
Former Speaker of the House John Boehner. (Photo: Win McNamee/Getty Images)
Last week’s bipartisan budget agreement was hailed by John Boehner as “the first significant reform to Social Security since 1983”; proof, according to the Los Angeles Times, that Social Security remains the “third rail” of American politics. Among its purported accomplishments, the new budget apparently saved the disability program from the precipice of disaster and introduced new measures to prevent fraud. Here’s the thing though: A rare opportunity to actually improve the program was lost.
The deal averted a potentially devastating cut to the more than 10 million people who receive benefits from the Social Security Disability Insurance program — perhaps our country’s most important, yet least talked about, social welfare program. The Trust Fund supporting the program was projected to run out of money by the end of next year. Had the deal not gone forward to restore the program’s financing (albeit only for another six years), a 19 percent benefit cut could have materialized. Yet, in making no substantive changes to the program, a critical chance to reform the program and to help millions of people with disabilities return to work was also missed.
Rather than waiting six years for the next Trust Fund crisis, politicians from both parties would be wise to re-focus their efforts on improving our Disability Insurance program to help people return to work.
Current policies fail to provide adequate incentives and support to help those with disabilities stay in and get back to work. Data shows that 40 percent of DI beneficiaries want to return to work, yet less than four percent actually do. DI beneficiaries experience systematic disincentives for returning to work, including the lack of early intervention options, access to rehabilitation services, and the pervasive fear of giving up benefits for an unstable labor market. Rather than waiting six years for the next Trust Fund crisis, politicians from both parties would be wise to re-focus their efforts on improving our DI program to help people return to work.
The economic status of people with disabilities has been declining for years despite the adoption of the Americans With Disabilities Act, which prohibited employers from discrimination against people with disabilities. Since 1990, employment rates for people with disabilities has fallen by four to seven percentage points every five years, while the rate for people without disabilities has remained constant. The rapidly aging American population can partially explain this decline; as we get older, we are more likely to experience a work-limiting disability. But research also points to declining wages for low-skilled workers, which makes DI benefits more attractive for many people with health conditions who are struggling to provide for themselves and their families through their jobs. Having an impairment can lead to a number of extra costs that most people without disabilities do not have, such as costly medical, transportation, and caregiving expenses. It’s not that people who end up on DI don’t want to work; they simply can’t afford to work in increasingly insecure employment situations.
The list of policy solutions that could have been adopted is a long one. We could have increased wages by expanding the earned income tax credit to cover people with disabilities. We could have created incentives for employers to accommodate their workers with disabilities. We could have introduced transportation vouchers to help people with disabilities get to and from work. We could have developed early intervention health services for people at risk of becoming long-term disabled. We could have introduced a temporary rehabilitation benefit program targeted at individuals on the border of DI eligibility.
Other countries have adopted innovative disability policies. In Austria, a recent reform provides “rehabilitation before pension,” thus treating permanent disability benefits as an option of last resort. In Denmark, young people under the age of 40 are ineligible for permanent disability benefits and instead receive substantial support in their return to work. In the United Kingdom, a temporary disability benefit provides personalized employment services to claimants with impairments who also possess remaining work abilities. Similar reforms in the Netherlands and Sweden have proven successful at helping people with disabilities return to paid work. What makes these countries distinct from ours is that they have all fundamentally reformed their support systems to help people with disabilities get back to work.
Rather than considering any of these options, we are left with our current DI program, which is woefully ineffective at helping beneficiaries return to work. Let’s not wait another six years to make disability benefit reform a reality.

Health Insurance Industry Fudges Data To Downplay Its Astronomical Profits
By Igor Volsky

America’s Health Insurance Plans (AHIP) — the lobbying arm of the insurance industry — maintains that “for every dollar spent on health care in America, approximately 1 penny goes to health plans’ profits.” The group’s health care reform website offers the helpful visual of a subdivided dollar bill: “Fact Check: Setting the Record Straight on Health Plans’ Profits,” one blog post exclaims. Only one one-hundredth of the premium dollar is pocketed by the insurer, the rest is spent on providing medical care.
But as NPR’s All Things Considered points out the group’s “fact check” is itself misleading, since insurers are measuring their profits against total health care spending, not company revenues. “All that statement says is, if you eliminated all our [insurance company] profits, national health spending in America would be 1 percent lower. It has meaning only in that context,” health care economist Uwe Reinhardt explains. Within the context of companies’ revenues, insurers skim off 15–20 percent of premium dollars for administrative costs and profits. In fact, an examination of insurers’ medical loss ratio — the fraction of revenue from a plan’s premiums that goes to pay for medical services — suggests that within the last 10 years, insurers have been spending less on medical care and more on administrative costs or profits:

Moreover, a report by Families USA found that “insurers in the individual market sometimes maintain medical loss ratios of only 60%, retaining 40% of premium dollars for administration, marketing and profit.” “For the 10 biggest insurers in the year 2006 (the year the insurers used for the 1 cent out of every dollar depiction above), profits were anywhere from 2 to 10 percent, or two to 10 pennies on the dollar. That’s two to 10 times as much as what the insurance industry group suggests in its illustrations.”
The top five earning insurance companies averaged profits of $1.56 billion in 2008 and reported spending an average of “more than 18 percent of their revenues on marketing, administration, and profits.” That year, CEO compensation for these companies ranged from $3 million to $24 million.” Below is a partial list of insurer/CEO profits:
Insurer:Company Profits:CEO Total Compensation:CEO 5 Year Compensation:UnitedHealth Group$2,977,000,000$5,030,000 — WellPoint$2,490,700,000$4,070,000 — Atena$1,384,100,000$38,860,000$77,860,000Humana$647,000,000$2,390,000$56,910,000Cigna$292,000,000$30,016,000$120,510,000
CEO compensation seems to be decreasing, if ever so slightly. A survey by Modern Healthcare “of compensation for the health care CEOs” failed — for the first time in seven years — to turn up a healthcare CEO who raked in more than $15 million in compensation last year.” The performance of the stock market in 2008 was a big reason that the compensation of the 30 CEOs covered by the survey was relatively low, Kaiser Health News noted. But the “relative down year” for these executives “probably won’t generate much empathy” for them because “the median compensation… was still a bit more than $4 million. Moreover, as the detailed disclosures on executive pay required by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission show, every CEO has stock options that could be worth millions as the equity markets recover.”
Despite lower than expected profits, insurers are not holding back. The industry already set records from January to March, “when health-care firms and their lobbyists spent money at the rate of $1.4 million a day” on campaigns designed to influence the health care reform legislation now moving through Congress.

Arizona Becomes First State To Officially Limit Abortion Coverage In Health Insurance Exchanges
By Igor Volsky

The nation is rightly focused on Arizona’s draconian new immigration law, but Gov. Jan Brewer (R-AZ) — who is running for her first full term in office this year — has just signed another regressive bill that could severely restrict women’s access to abortion coverage.
On Saturday, “at the Center for Arizona Policy Family dinner before 1600 guests,” Brewer signed SB 1305, the first-in-the nation bill that would prohibit insurers in the state-run health care exchange “from providing coverage for abortions unless the coverage is offered as a separate optional rider for which an additional insurance premium is charged.”
The new Arizona law is a radical mini Stupak. It prevents insurers from offering abortion services, except under the most extreme circumstances, even if only private money were used to pay for those services. Most if not all women in the exchange would only be able to purchase coverage through an impractical, separate abortion “rider” or leave the exchange entirely and find coverage in the shrinking individual health insurance market. Since it’s unlikely that many insurers will offer abortion riders or that women will purchase them in anticipation of needing an abortion — in fact, “in the five states where abortion riders are currently required, no insurance company offers them” — the Arizona law will severely disadvantage poorer women who would likely have to pay out of pocket for abortion services.
Many other states are considering similar bans, but only Arizona has the distinction of leading the nation in adopting the most conservative social policies. Earlier this month, Brewer also signed a measure requiring abortion providers “to report on the individual abortions they perform. Though the names of the women would remain confidential, the bill would also require statistics on how many times courts bypassed parental consent laws, among other things.”

Insurance companies right now would do anything to grab some free advertising space and position themselves as forward-looking. There is no comprehensive, independently performed available research into auto-pilot safety yet, just few real cases that have no statistic meaning to back lowering insurance fee for self-driving vehicles.


Insurance Requirements for the Sharing Economy
I am in agreement with most of the sections of Florida HB509 and how fast it is moving through the process. My concerns are there appears to be lax insurance requirements for the gap that exists between when the driver turns on the app and gets a request. My proposal is business use insurance that requires a minimum of 300/100k Liability 100k Collision 300/100k UnInsured Motorist and 100k Medical Payments.
I last week decided to stop driving for Uber due to a number of Factors. I gain New Business connections WorldWide on a daily basis and will be making business deals over the next few weeks. I am slowly brining my websites online and entering multiple markets that are Luxury Travel focused. I have been invited to Dubai and Abu Dhabi to discuss potential business relationships. Tonight I am meeting with an Orlando Executive. I am considering selling 4.9 million shares to trained drivers who already have commercial insurance and permits.
I would love to discuss my vision for the future of transportation in Orlando with the Senate. The transportation industry will continue to evolve as the sharing economy grows stronger. This has created a lot of risk for all involved.
How do we bridge the Gap between the establishment and the ever evolving technologies funded by the major investment banks? I will discuss this and other challenges facing the livery industry in future articles. Remember that companies who invest in people will most likely have less employee turnover. This is key in the sharing economy.
This Article Was Written By Matthew Gellman
Founder/CEO UpClass Luxury Ride
Copyright 2016 Matthew Gellman
http://matthewgellman.com

The Luxury of Dental Insurance

Jess Stoner has a fascinating and cringe-inducing essay on The Morning News about dental insurance, or lack thereof. She talks a little about the history of dental care (ancient Egyptians! Keri Russell!), her own experiences with uninsured dental care, and how we’re all basically screwed:
“During my first appointment, there were 20 of us in one large room, like a field hospital. The days of a private space where I didn’t have to watch an elderly man’s dentures get refit while my own mouth was tended to seemed like a heady dream. Listening to the whimpers of pained strangers, I learned an incredibly important lesson I have never forgotten: We’re all fucked.
Or to rephrase: “Tooth decay is the province of the poor.” Or perhaps, to add an addendum to that rephrase: “Tooth decay is also the province of the somewhat privileged whose shallow pockets are filled with advances on school loans.”
Jess points out that the number of people without dental insurance is three times that of those without health insurance. It seems that I hear of more and more people who work full-time and have health benefits but not dental, so this doesn’t surprise me. When did dental benefits become a luxury?
When it comes out of your own budget, as it would for many of us, writing off dental care, much less dental insurance, is easy to do. That is until you have any dental problem at all, as Jess Stoner recounts in her essay, and you end up either charging painful, hackneyed dental procedures to your credit card or living in pain for how many years until you give in and charge painful, hackneyed dental procedures on your credit card. God help us all.
I had dental insurance for the first time in years at my last job, and for some reason I elected to pay the extra $10-ish a month to upgrade to the fancy kind. This made me feel adult and secure in a purely abstract way, as it took me about a year to get around to making an appointment (my first dental appointment in over a decade, whoops) and I never went back.
Then when I left my job in May, my COBRA quote for dental insurance was $40/month which seemed reasonable, especially compared to the $761/month I’d have to pay to keep my health insurance. But when I thought about the fact that a cleaning costs, what, $100-$200, even at the fancy place I went to in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, where the spiky-haired, boyband dentist reviews your x-rays with you on an iPad. $40/month is $500 a year! Think of all the Madewell dresses I could buy with that money. I decided my cavity-free buck teeth and I would just pray nothing too bad happened to them.
And for those of you who are insured: go the dentist! Use your insurance! Luxuriate in your weirdly and unjustly unattainable benefits package. The rest of us will be over here diligently flossing for the first time in our lives, purely out of fear.
Photo: Kristine Paulus

Insurance Technology Funding Trends — Q1 2017
The following graphs highlight recent trends in Insurance Technology (InsurTech) funding activity.
InsurTech Funding Over TIme
The above graph summarizes the total funding raised by InsurTech startups for each year. 2014 is the best year so far with just over $6B in funding. 2015 comes in at second place with just under $4B in funding.
InsurTech Vintage Year Funding
The above graph summarizes the total amount of funding raised by InsurTech companies founded in a certain year. Companies founded in 2013 have raised the most funding at around $2.6B, followed by those founded in 2014 which have raised about $1B.
We are currently tracking 1,022 Insurance Technology companies in 14 categories across 54 countries, with a total of $17 Billion in funding. Click here to learn more about the full Insurance Technology report and database.

Nathan Myhrvold jumps the shark — and jumps ship on Levitt and Dubner (on their blog!) asserting: “Geoengineering is proposed only as a last resort to try to reduce or cope with the even greater harms of global warming! … The point of the chapter in SuperFreakonomics is that geoengineering might be good insurance in case we dont get global warming under control.” Did he even read the book?
Un-friggin-believable.
Nathan Myhrvold, who Levitt and Dubner call the “polymath’s polymath” — who is one of the primary “experts” the authors rely on to make the case for their central geoengineering-only approach to global warming — has just publicly repudiated that approach. Apparently he never read the chapter — or didn’t understand it if he did. And apparently in their rush to print this “rebuttal” to my debunkings, the Superfreaks didn’t bother to read it closely, since he just wrote this jaw-dropper on their blog:
Geoengineering is proposed only as a last resort to try to reduce or cope with the even greater harms of global warming!
… The point of the chapter in SuperFreakonomics is that geoengineering might be good insurance in case we don’t get global warming under control.
You can’t make this stuff up.
As the Union of Concerned Scientists posted here about Myhrvold’s amazing defense repudiation of Superfreakonomics:
That is exactly the opposite of what the book argues and represents a complete repudiation of the chapter from one of the main sources on which Levitt and Dubner relied.
Or go to the Bloomberg interview of Dubner and Caldeira that backs up my reporting on error-riddled Superfreakonomics for an independent view of what the book is about — and what the authors think the book is about:
Caldeira, who is researching the idea [of aerosol geoengineering], argues that it can succeed only if we first reduce emissions. Otherwise, he says, geoengineering can’t begin to cope with the collateral damage, such as acidic oceans killing off shellfish.
Levitt and Dubner ignore his view and champion his work as a permanent substitute for emissions cuts. When I told Dubner that Caldeira doesn’t believe geoengineering can work without cutting emissions, he was baffled. “I don’t understand how that could be,” he said. In other words, the Freakonomics guys just flunked climate science.
Are you baffled also? The two leading experts (well, one expert and one F.A.K.E.R.) that Dubner and Leavitt relied on for their geoengineering-only solution don’t believe in it! Well, Caldeira doesn’t believe in it. As we’ll see, it’s impossible to figure out what Myhrvold believes.
Myhrvold is not a “polymath’s polymath.” He repudiates the Superfreaks, so he’s a contrarian’s contrarian.
Why exactly does Myhrvold think the Superfreaks were so desperate to push the (incorrect) statement about Caldeira that his “research tells him that carbon dioxide is not the right villain”? Since the Superfreaks made me take the PDF of the book down, go to the NPR interview of Levitt (transcript here):
So we’re not — look, I’m not a scientist and Steven Dubner’s not a scientist either, but we’ve managed to interact with some of the greatest scientists in this country. I think what we conclude is that the nature of the debate is just completely wrong. The real problem isn’t that there’s too much carbon in the air. The real problem is it’s too hot.
Ouch. But now it looks like the greatest scientists in this country don’t even agree with them.
Read the Times online excerpt whose subhead actually claims “This time they claim that CO2 may be good”!
The book itself says:
It’s not that we don’t know how to stop polluting the atmosphere. We don’t want to stop or aren’t willing to pay the price.
And then there is Myhrvold himself in the book — for extended quotes see “Error-riddled Superfreakonomics’, Part 2”:
“If you believe that the scary stories could be true, or even possible, then you should also admit that relying only on reducing carbon-dioxide emissions is not a very good answer,” he says. In other words: it’s illogical to believe in a carbon-induced warming apocalypse and believe that such an apocalypse can be averted simply by curtailing new carbon emissions. “The scary scenarios could occur even if we make Herculean efforts to reduce our emissions, in which case the only real answer is geo-engineering.”
As I said in Part 1, not only is it not illogical, but I suspect most of the world’s leading climate scientists believe that if you could curtail all new carbon emissions (including from deforestation) starting now (or even starting soon), you would indeed avoid apocaplyse. In fact, as Caldeira makes clear, the reverse of Myrhvold’s final statement is true: ONLY if we make Herculean efforts to reduce our emissions, could geo-engineering possibly contribute to the solution.
But Myhrvold says (from the Times online excerpt):
Myhrvold is not arguing for an immediate deployment of the sulphur shield but, rather, that technologies like it be researched and tested so they are ready to use if the worst climate predictions come true.
Good for him. He’s “not arguing for an immediate deployment” of something that doesn’t exist. Good strategy. If only his former company, Microsoft, had applied that approach with the Windows Vista operating system. Zing!
So why is he pushing this approach?
He is also eager to get geoengineering moving forward because of what he sees as “a real head of steam” that global warming activists have gathered in recent years.
“They are seriously proposing doing a set of things that could have enormous impact “” and we think probably negative impact “” on human life,” he says. “They want to divert a huge amount of economic value toward immediate and precipitous anti-carbon initiatives, without thinking things through.
“This will have a huge drag on the world economy. There are billions of poor people who will be greatly delayed, if not entirely precluded, from attaining a First World standard of living.”
Ah, those extremist, nutty “global warming activists” — like, say, climatologist Ken Caldeira himself who has said:
I believe the correct CO2 emission target is zero. I believe that it is essentially immoral for us to be making devices (automobiles, coal power plants, etc) that use the atmosphere as a sewer for our waste products. I am in favor of outlawing production of such devices as soon as possible”¦.
Every carbon dioxide emission adds to climate damage and increasing risk of catastrophic consequences. There is no safe level of emission.
I compare CO2 emissions to mugging little old ladies “¦ It is wrong to mug little old ladies and wrong to emit carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. The right target for both mugging little old ladies and carbon dioxide emissions is zero.
I am in favor of fire insurance but I am also against playing with matches while sitting on a keg of gunpowder. I am in favor of research into geoengineering options but I am also against carbon dioxide emissions.
Nathan is apparently pushing geo-engineering research because people like Caldeira (and me) want to immediately and precipitously cut carbon.
But wait, Myhrvold now says on the Superfreaks blog:
Geoengineering is proposed only as a last resort to try to reduce or cope with the even greater harms of global warming! The global-warming community has treated us to one scary scenario after another. Some are predicted by the science, some are extrapolations beyond current science, and some are not much better than wild guesses, but they could happen. Should we fail at cutting enough and those things occur, geoengineering might offer a better option….
This kind of attack [by Romm] makes it very difficult for people to suggest new ideas. I have thick enough skin to laugh it off when Romm attacks me, but plenty of people don’t. The politicization of science has a terrible impact on the unfettered discourse of ideas that is so important to making progress. This has been a big impediment to geoengineering. Serious climate scientists who are privately interested in geoengineering are loathe to discuss it publicly because they worry that somebody like Romm will attack and ridicule them if they do. Indeed, part of the reason I chose to work on geoengineering and chose to go public about it is to try to get the topic to be more widely discussed.
The point of the chapter in SuperFreakonomics is that geoengineering might be good insurance in case we don’t get global warming under control.
Except, of course, I have only been attacking and ridiculing people who support the geoengineering-only approach — the very approach that Myhrvold himself utterly rejects here.
Yes, good old reasonable Nathan Myhrvold, who just sees geoengineering as an insurance policy “in case we don’t get global warming under control.” But then, of course, he trashes the “global warming activists” who want to do just that in the book. It is Myhrvold and the Superfreaks who have poisoned the dialogue. Indeed, they go out of their way to attack and ridicule those who want to try to get global warming under control sans geoengineering. As I note in “Error-riddled ‘Superfreakonomics’, Part 2,” Myhrvold and the geniuses groupthinkers at IV, however, dismiss all of the solutions:
In the darkened conference room, Myhrvold cues up an overhead slide that summarizes IV’s views of the current slate of proposed global warming solutions. The slide says:
Too little
Too late
Too optimistic.
Too little means that typical conservation efforts simply won’t make much of a difference. “If you believe there is a problem worth solving,” Myhrvold says, “then these solutions won’t be enough to solve it. Wind power and most other alternative energy things are cute, but they don’t scale to a sufficient degree. At this point, wind farms are a government subsidy scheme, fundamentally.” What about the beloved Prius and other low-emissions vehicles? “They’re great,” he says, “except that transportation is just not that big of a sector.”
[Pause for laughter. Then for weeping.]
Yes, as I noted, globally “Transport accounts for around a quarter of total CO2 emissions.” In fact, transport is the key sector, because reducing carbon emissions in electricity generation is so damn easy (see “An introduction to the core climate solutions”).
That’s why I call Myhrvold and his ilk, F.A.K.E.R.s “” Famous “Authorities” whose Knowledge (of climate) is Error-riddled.
And, then we get this multi-whopper piece of nonsense:
Too optimistic: “A lot of the things that people say would be good things probably aren’t,” Myrhvold says. As an example he points to solar power. “The problem with solar cells is that they’re black, because they are designed to absorb light from the sun. But only about 12% gets turned into electricity, and the rest is reradiated as heat “” which contributed to global warming.”
As discussed in Part 1, this may set the FAKER record for howlers in one paragraph.
In his “rebuttal,” Myhrvold never actually debunks the central critique I make of that paragraph. I have a little bombshell to drop on that tomorrow, which some readers have asked to see, so for now, let me end by noting one typically nonsensical thing Myhrvold says in his rambling, ad hominem attack on me:
Strangely, he gives comparatively little attention to the main point of the chapter, which is geoengineering.
Please do go check the quote at the Freakonomics blog here.
I give “comparatively little attention to the main point of the chapter, which is geoengineering.”??? You can’t make this stuff up — unless of course you’re a “polymath’s polymath.”
So now we know that not only didn’t he read the chapter of SuperFreakonomics he is defending repudiating defending repudiating, he didn’t even bother to read “Error-riddled Superfreakonomics, Part 1,” which he links to in his defense repudiation (!), in which I repost Caldeira’s devastating critique of the geoengineering-only approach (and add some of my own) or “Error-riddled Superfreakonomics, Part 2,” which focuses on him, in which I actually repost Robock’s entire critique of the geoengineering-only approach, complete with citations.
His post vindicates my original assessment.
I believe the correct CO2 emission target is zero. I believe that it is essentially immoral for us to be making devices (automobiles, coal power plants, etc) that use the atmosphere as a sewer for our waste products. I am in favor of outlawing production of such devices as soon as possible”¦.
Every carbon dioxide emission adds to climate damage and increasing risk of catastrophic consequences. There is no safe level of emission.
I compare CO2 emissions to mugging little old ladies “¦ It is wrong to mug little old ladies and wrong to emit carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. The right target for both mugging little old ladies and carbon dioxide emissions is zero.
I am in favor of fire insurance but I am also against playing with matches while sitting on a keg of gunpowder. I am in favor of research into geoengineering options but I am also against carbon dioxide emissions.
Carbon dioxide emissions represent a real threat to humans and natural systems, and I fear we may have already dawdled too long. That is why I want to see research into geoengineering “” because the threat posed by CO2 is real and large, not because the threat is imaginary and small.

Restaurateur To Introduce Salaries, Stable Schedules, And Health Insurance For Employees
The interior of Bar Marco CREDIT: BAR MARCO
Bar Marco, a Pittsburgh-based restaurant, has been around for three years. But starting later this year, its employees will no longer receive tips. Instead, they’ll get a salary, 40 dependable hours a week, and health care benefits.
“It started about a year ago,” co-owner Robert Fry told ThinkProgress. He was listening to a Freakonomics podcast about the downsides of tipping. The quality of service only accounts for a percentage point or so difference in tip size; instead, it’s more likely to be influenced by whether a server is white, a woman, or physically attractive. He was also thinking about heading into the third year of his restaurant being open. “It’s kind of a make it or break it year in a restaurant,” he said. “Seventy percent of restaurants fail within the first three years.”
He wanted to give employees health care coverage while also increasing efficiency to make it through the long run. Employees living off of tips and working ever-changing schedules were top on the list of inefficiencies. “All those things kind of dragged on service,” he said. “If you try to force people to put up with an inefficient system for too long, that’s why restaurants end up going stale.” After looking at profit projections along with labor costs, he calculated that it could get rid of tips while giving everyone a salary and remain “pretty safe.”
Starting next quarter, more experienced staff and those in the front of the house will get at least $35,000 a year. (Median pay for food and beverage servers is $18,400 a year.) They’ll get standard health benefits. Everyone will have a set 40-hour workweek schedule. He noted that in the industry, “everyone’s overworked for the most part, and we’re just going to eliminate that by making it a more consistent process.”
Unlike most restaurants, workers in the kitchen will also be salaried staff. “If you’re burning out your kitchen at $10 an hour, you can come up with the greatest menu in the world, but unless you have people who can execute it the same time every time, what’s the point,” he noted.
Meanwhile, all tips received will go to the restaurant’s related nonprofit, Food Revolution, which has top chefs give cooking lessons to underserved kids.
The benefits of these changes, which haven’t even taken place yet, have already accrued to the restaurant: After it sent out a tweet broadcasting that it’s hiring more full-time positions that won’t work for gratuities, he said it’s received 250 resumes. “It means we can keep the team that we have and make sure they know in three years we’re not going to burn them out,” he said. And he expects it will be a boon to the work being done. Without tips, employees “will be empowered to really make us run as efficiently as possible,” he said. Meanwhile, eliminating tips will help the business by not papering over bad service. When a customer has a bad experience, “what happens is you don’t come back,” he noted. “So it actually hides service problems.”
And he says all of this can be done without increasing prices. By spending more on high-quality staff and tools, they’ll be able to buy bigger cuts of meat or larger shares of in-season vegetables and utilize them for the menu. “You actually add more to your depth and to the plate that costs you less money in ingredient costs and a little more in employee costs,” he explained.
Fry thinks getting rid of tips in favor of better benefits will soon be commonplace. “It’s pretty clear that this is the way that the industry’s going to go,” he said. “I think every restaurant has to come up with its own plan on how it works.” There are a number of others that have already taken this approach, from high-end eateries in New York City and the West Coast to a brewpub in Washington, DC, a brasserie in Philadelphia, and a meat-based restaurant in Kentucky.

Anti-Choice Leader: Rape Is Like A Car Accident, So Women Should Buy ‘Extra Insurance’ For Abortion

Arguing that Michigan women should be forced to buy separate insurance coverage for abortion services, even in the cases of rape or incest, a prominent anti-choice leader in the state claimed that paying extra money to terminate a pregnancy resulting from rape is the same thing as paying extra money for car insurance.
Right to Life of Michigan is currently pushing to prohibit the state’s insurance providers from covering elective abortion services, which would force women to pay additional money to purchase a separate insurance rider to terminate a pregnancy. If the group collects enough signatures, the issue will appear on the 2014 state ballot. This week, when reporters asked Right to Life president Barbara Listing why the proposed insurance ban doesn’t include an exception for rape or incest, she compared those sexual crimes to car accidents and floods.
“It’s simply, like, nobody plans to have an accident in a car accident, nobody plans to have their homes flooded. You have to buy extra insurance for those,” Listing explained.
Jessica Tramontana, a spokesperson for the liberal activist group Progress Michigan, called Listing’s comments “appalling” and pointed out that rape can’t be compared to those catastrophic events because sexual assault isn’t actually an accident. “Nobody can anticipate being the victim of a crime,” Tramontana said.
Ultimately, requiring women who become pregnant from rape to negotiate additional red tape to terminate that pregnancy forces them to bear an even greater burden for the crime perpetrated against them. Women should not have to plan ahead for rape and buy a second insurance plan in advance, just as they should not have to carefully select the clothing they wear to prevent being sexually assaulted.
Preventing insurance plans from covering abortion is a popular anti-choice tactic — and represents just one of many ways that anti-choice politicians successfully drive up the cost of women’s reproductive rights — but Michigan’s stringent version of the policy is out of step with the national standard. The federal government, 32 states, and the District of Columbia all offer exceptions in the cases of rape and incest in their bans on public funding for abortion. Americans also overwhelmingly support ensuring that victims of rape and incest have access to abortion services.
This isn’t the first time that abortion opponents have suggested that sexual assault is somehow analogous to car trouble. In 2011, when Kansas was considering the time type of insurance ban, a state lawmaker suggested that women could plan ahead for rape just like drivers plan ahead by bringing a spare tire.

Cheap insurance made early electric trucks irresistible for city delivery
Petrol Vehicles Had A Bad Reputation For Catching Fire Those Days

Is there a word for the fear of your phone combusting inside your pocket? While rogue batteries are rare — considering that billions are in use — each battery fire is one too many for the reputation of lithium-ion storage.
Petrol vehicles had the same image problem a century ago. Reports of cars and trucks catching fire were common, and sometimes a house or a barn would burn down along with the automobile. In consequence, “gasoline machines were often excluded from docks, piers and terminals.” This was an opportunity for electric trucks that were otherwise hard to sell because of their restricted range.
Cost advantage
Electric trucks those days had one great advantage over both horse wagons and petrol vehicles — they were very cheap to run. Data collected by Massachusetts Institute of Technology at the time showed that horse wagons were most economical in only suburban delivery. Otherwise, “in city service of the same sort, electricity was found to be the cheapest means of propulsion.”
For various businesses — furniture delivery, brewing service, coal-hauling — electric trucks were the most economical, and petrol trucks the most expensive for delivery in the city and suburban markets.
By 1913, America had 10,000 electric trucks. New York alone had 1,700. Chicago had 630 — an increase of 400% in two years — but it led in the number of electric cars with about 2,200. Then came a sweetener in the form of lower insurance rates for electric vehicles.
Insurance treat
Electric trucks were not considered a fire hazard, so they could be used in docks, piers and terminals. And then, the New England Casualty Company, “after careful study of the subject” made electrics substantially cheaper to insure than petrol vehicles.
The new rates “covering loss by fire and theft went into effect all over the United States” on April 1, 1913. For petrol vehicles, the rates started at 1.625% for expensive new cars, increased to 3.125% for cheap second hand cars, and peaked at 4.875% for cars considered an “uninsurable risk from the standpoint of the underwriters.”
But electrics were insured at a flat rate of 1.5%, and if you didn’t want coverage for theft, the rate came down to 1.375%. The electric truck thus became the smart choice for businesses delivering within city limits.
***


How Artificial Intelligence Will Revolutionize the Insurance Industry:
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is revolutionizing every industry, and insurance will be affected as well, with an increasing degree of accuracy.
Originally published on Tumblr

DNA and Insurance
Kevin Drum had an interesting post up yesterday about the problematic interaction between genetic testing of various sorts and the vagaries of the health insurance industry. It’s worth emphasizing that this issue is almost certainly going to grow more intense over time as our understanding of genetics increases. Basically, you’ll have a situation where unless we can substantially reduce private health insurance’s role in the financing and delivery of health care, everyone’s going to be going around deliberately ignorant of tons of medically useful information.
Meanwhile, I should add that though I understand the political rationale for trying to basically regulate insurance firms out of the discrimination business rather than simply killing the firms off, I wouldn’t be optimistic about success over the long run. Risk assessment and risk screening is the raison d’être of the insurance firm — it’s what the business, fundamentally, is all about. We ought to have faith that market capitalism will quickly enough find ways to de facto achieve whatever risk screening is de jure prohibited. It becomes essentially a question of savvy marketing and product design to make sure that your particular insurance package is mostly bought be a disproportionately young and healthy customers.

How Paul Ryan And His Supporters Profit From The Private Insurance Industry
By Sy Mukherjee

Paul Ryan and his GOP colleagues have always had the private insurance industry’s back, long advocating for health care policies — such as Ryan’s proposed budget that would turn Medicare into a voucher program — that boost insurance companies’ profits at the expense of American consumers.
According to a new Public Campaign Action Fund (PCAF) and Health Care for American Now (HCAN) analysis, insurers are returning the favor to the tune of $14 million in campaign contributions to Ryan and fellow Republican supporters of his “premium support” plan.
The report also reveals that Ryan’s running mate, GOP presidential nominee Mitt Romney, has received close to $2.7 million from the private insurance industry.
All told, the study finds that eight out of the top ten recipients of insurance industry cash during the 2012 election cycle — including every member of the House GOP leadership — are supporters of the Ryan plan.
Ryan himself has pulled in more cash from private insurance employees and their families than he has from any other businesses — totaling $815,328 over the course of his political career.

Florida Is Trying To Attract Foreign Patients Instead Of Extending Insurance To Its Own Residents
Renee Walker, from Orlando, holds a sign criticizing Florida’s decision not to expand Medicad during the kickoff for “Moral Monday” on March 3, 2014 in the state’s Capitol Courtyard CREDIT: AP PHOTO/PHIL SEARS
By Sy Mukherjee
Florida lawmakers may vote to spend millions of dollars to encourage sick people to use local health care services — just not the hundreds of thousands of poor and uninsured people who actually live in the Sunshine State.
The Florida state Senate’s Commerce and Tourism committee unanimously backed a bill on Tuesday that would appropriate $5 million in 2015 for attracting medical tourism — a burgeoning industry in which people travel to other countries to seek health care that is either too expensive or too difficult to access in their own. If the full legislature passes the funding, Florida’s tourism arm will direct a marketing campaign that plays up the state’s health care providers and specialty medical services to an international audience.
Medical tourism usually brings to mind the hundreds of thousands of Americans — both insured and uninsured — who go to other countries such as Costa Rica, Mexico, India, Thailand, and Brazil to seek treatment because medical care in the United States can be prohibitively expensive. But according to Patients Beyond Borders, between 600,000 and 800,000 foreign patients came to the U.S. for health services in 2013 despite the relatively high costs of care here. These patients are often from countries that have yet to develop certain advanced procedures or technologies, or where those procedures are still far too costly. For instance, many international consumers visit well-known clinics such as the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio, Johns Hopkins in Maryland, and the Mayo Clinic arms in Arizona, Minnesota, and Florida for cancer care and dental, orthopedic, and cosmetic surgery.
Those are all still pretty expensive and lucrative specialized procedures that attract patients who can afford them (on top of an international trip to the United States). So it’s not surprising that the Mayo Clinic Hospital in Jacksonville, Florida is a big supporter of the bill, which was proposed by state Senate Health Policy Committee Chair Aaron Bean (R). “Florida can and should be a top-tier health care destination,” said Bean of his legislation.
But while Bean and his fellow lawmakers think it’s worth spending millions in state dollars catering to a relatively wealthy international crowd’s health care needs, they’re much less inclined to take approximately $51 billion from the federal government to expand Medicaid under Obamacare and provide basic health benefits to about 850,000 poor people who are actually living in the state today.
Florida has the second-highest uninsurance rate in the entire country. Very few adults qualify for Medicaid under the state’s current rules, which only makes the program available to parents with dependent children who make just a third of the poverty level. Gov. Rick Scott (R-FL) stunned many political observers by embracing the Medicaid expansion in early 2013. “While the federal government is committed to paying 100 percent of the cost of new people in Medicaid, I cannot, in good conscience, deny the uninsured access to care,” said Scott at the time.
But Florida lawmakers have repeatedly failed to pass Medicaid expansion, and Scott began dodging questions on whether he still supports the provision after he filed for re-election. Most recently, reports have surfaced that Bean — the medical tourism bill’s main sponsor — may block a GOP proposal to accept billions in Medicaid expansion dollars. Bean prefers “a state-based, highly limited insurance exchange that… technically cannot be called an ‘insurance exchange’ because the products are so limited they do not meet the legal definition of insurance,” according Florida health reform advocate Gary Stein.
The Scott administration is currently facing fines by the federal government for imposing an illegal cap on the number of times that Florida’s Medicaid beneficiaries can visit the emergency room annually.

Republican Senator Tries To Add Conception Amendment To Flood Insurance Bill
By Annie-Rose Strasser

Floods and abortions are distinctly different topics — except to Sen. Rand Paul (R-KY), who is trying to attach an anti-choice amendment to the Senate’s flood insurance bill.
After years of delay, senators recently came to an agreement over the flood bill and were set to vote on it this week.
But now, Paul is threatening to hold up its final passage by adding an amendment defining when life begins. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-NV) expressed his displeasure with that move this morning, saying he would not bring the bill up for a vote if the amendment is added:
This is ridiculous, that somebody says I’m not going to let this bill goes forward unless I have a vote on when life begins. I am not going to do that, and I think I speak for the majority of senators. Now, if the Republicans won’t stand up to the person who is going to do that, I’m not going to. I have tried my best to deal with these issues that have nothing to do with a piece of legislation.
Watch it:

The National Flood Insurance Program helps homeowners whose houses are destroyed by floods — like those that devastated Minnesota and are currently sweeping Florida — and has absolutely nothing to do with abortion or conception.

No, Obamacare Won’t Raise Insurance Premiums In Indiana By 72 Percent
By Sy Mukherjee

On Friday, the Indiana Department of Insurance announced that initial rates submitted by individual health plan providers for the state’s Obamacare insurance marketplace (which will be operated by the federal government) would cost 72 percent more than currently available plans, or about $570 per month. But that’s a very disingenuous figure, and a closer look at the real numbers indicate that many Hoosiers will be paying significantly less than what state officials are implying.
Gov. Mike Pence’s (R) administration was quick to use the figures to criticize the health law. In an interview with the Indy Star, Logan Harrison, the chief deputy commissioner of the Indiana Department of Insurance, said, “This new data regrettably confirms the negative impact of the Affordable Care Act on the insurance market in Indiana.”
The problem is, the Department of Insurance didn’t really release “data” in the plural — it released a single data point. The $570 per month figure is the average of all of the submitted rates, including cheaper plans with less benefits (so-called “Bronze” and “Silver” level plans) as well as the more generous and expensive “Gold” and “Platinum” level plans. That’s like saying the average cost of a car in an Indiana dealership is $100,000 because it sells $20,000 Fords, $60,000 BMWs, and $220,000 Lamborghinis — technically true, but highly misleading.
But the Washington Post’s Sarah Kliff was able to get her hands on some of the actual submitted rates, including several insurers’ projections for what their bare-bones Bronze plans and mid-level Silver plans will cost — and they paint a very different picture from the Indiana government’s implication of massive hikes. Kliff found that Anthem, one of Indiana’s largest insurers, expects that a “47-year-old male who does not smoke would be charged, on average, $307 per month” for its Bronze-level plan, and that “[s]ample plans from another plan, MDWise, predict a 47-year-old man will be charged $294 and $391 for a bronze and silver plan, respectively.” Those plans will be far more robust than current ones available in Indiana, since the health law requires insurers to offer coverage for a range of ten “essential health benefits” — including maternal care, prescription drug services, and mental health care — that individual plans usually don’t.
And those numbers don’t even take Obamacare’s federal insurance subsidies into account. With those subsidies, low-income Indiana families would have to pay even less. For example, the Kaiser Family Foundation’s insurance subsidy calculator shows that a 47-year old, non-smoking male with a wife and household income of $35,000 would get about 70 percent of his premium for a Bronze-level plan covered by the federal government.
Kliff also makes the important point that past evidence in Massachusetts, where the law that inspired Obamacare has been in place for seven years, shows that the vast majority of consumers will opt for these cheaper, lower-benefit plans. There, almost half of all consumer opted for a bare-bones plan, another 35 percent bought a mid-level plan, and the rest bought other plans. Insurers in Indiana expect a similar breakdown to happen in 2014.
Until Indiana’s Department of Insurance releases the full list of submitted rates — instead of just one skewed figure — and specifies which level plans those rates are for, it’s impossible to know exactly what the insurance market in Indiana will look like under Obamacare. But other states that have released detailed information for their Bronze and Silver plans have found lower-than-expected prices for more robust insurance.

Sexy Models Get Me Hot About Car Insurance
Man, if I ever have a car accident, please let it be in Romania. They clearly do things differently there. [Warning: Includes sexy sexiness.]

Health Insurance Isn’t Supposed to Work Like This

There are lots of reasons you may have heard of Zoë Keating. She’s a prolific musician, turning her single cello into a thick, vibrant orchestra of sounds. She’s a social activist, lending her voice to causes such as Save the Post Office.
She’s also unafraid to write about money, and became the public face behind musician streaming revenue when she released her streaming revenue from Spotify, Pandora, and other sites online in a series of Google Docs. (The Atlantic helpfully summarized her data, if you like looking at charts.)
Last week, the internet learned about Zoë Keating in another, sadder way. Her husband, Jeffrey Rusch, has cancer, and Anthem Blue Cross sent the family a letter informing them that the health insurance company would not pay for any of his treatments.
Keating quotes from the letter on her Tumblr:
Our Medical Reviewer Layma Jarjour MD has determined we cannot approve your hospital stay for cancer. We do not have enough facts to show that it was medically necessary.
This came after Rusch’s primary care doctor ordered him to go to the hospital right away, after more than a pint of fluid was removed from his lungs, and after Rusch underwent a round of emergency chemotherapy.
This isn’t how the ACA is supposed to work. It isn’t how health insurance is supposed to work. As Keating noted, she and her family have paid more than $100,000 in premiums to Anthem Blue Cross since 2008. If you pay into the system, the system is supposed to take care of you.
Fans of Keating’s music quickly started sharing the story, filling Twitter feeds and Tumblr reblogs with links. The San Francisco CBS affiliate picked up the story and ran a piece titled Sonoma County Man Battling Cancer Denied Coverage By Anthem Blue Cross After Paying $100K In Premiums.
Then Keating got a call from an Anthem representative.
The call, which she has transcribed on her Tumblr, essentially states that when Anthem receives potential claims, it confirms with the hospital that those claims are medically necessary. Rusch’s hospital was slow on responding to Anthem, and when the system did not receive a response, it spit out the “not medically necessary” letter that Keating received. It was an error of automation, in many ways.
Rusch’s stay will be covered by his insurer. And we now all know a little bit more about how the health care system works.
Photo: George Kelly

Where in the World are Insurance Technology Startups? — Q4 2016
The analyses below summarize where Insurance Technology innovations are occurring.

The above map shows the number of Insurance Technology companies located in different countries. The United States ranks as the top country with around 556 companies.

The above map shows the amount of total Insurance Technology startup venture capital funding in different countries. The United States has the most VC funding at around $7.1B.
We are currently tracking 1013 Insurance Technology companies in 14 categories across 53 countries, with a total of $16.9 Billion in funding. Click here to learn more about the full Insurance Technology landscape report and database.

CBO: 90% Medical Loss Ratio Would Make Private Insurance A Government Program
By Igor Volsky

A compromise provision in the Senate health care bill that requires insurers to rebate beneficiaries if they fail to spend 90% of premium dollars on medical care could add new costs to the federal government, limiting health reform’s deficit reductions. Sen. Jay Rockefeller (D-WV) inserted the new medical loss ration (MLR) requirement (for insurers participating in the small or individual group markets) during the Gang of 10 public option negotiations, but a new directive from the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) may force Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-NV) to abandon the provision and could further undermine the now defunct compromise.
The CBO’s “harsh assessment” concluded that the 90% MLR requirement — which insurers would only have to maintain until 2014 — “would devastate the industry”:
A proposal to require health insurers to provide rebates to their enrollees to the extent that their medical loss ratios are less than 90 percent would effectively force insurers to achieve a high medical loss ratio. Combining this requirement with the other provisions of the PPACA would greatly restrict flexibility related to the sale and purchase of health insurance. In CBO’s view, this further expansion of the federal government’s role in the health insurance market would make such insurance an essentially governmental program, so that all payments related to health insurance policies should be recorded as cash flows in the federal budget.
The question of whether certain purchases of private health insurance “should be treated as part of the federal budget” is not insignificant. During President Clinton’s push to pass comprehensive health care reform, the CBO decided that “payments to and from the ‘health alliances’ should be included in the accounts of the federal government.” The decision artificially increased the bill’s score, dooming its chances in Congress.
Rockefeller argues that insurers that receive government subsidies should be required to spend those dollars on health care, not administrative overhead or profit. The 90% ratio replaced an existing provision that required insurers to maintain a medical loss ratio of 85%.

Santorum: Birth Control Is Not Something ‘You Need Insurance For’ Because It Costs ‘Just A Few Dollars’
By Igor Volsky
Rick Santorum told an audience at the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC) this morning that insurance plans shouldn’t cover contraception services because birth control “costs a few dollars” and is only a “minor expense” for women:
SANTORUM: [I]nterestingly enough, here is what they are forcing them to do — in an insurance policy, they or forcing them to pay for something that costs just a few dollars. Is that what insurance is for? The foundational idea that we have the government tells you that you have to pay for everything as a business. Things that are not really things you need insurance for, and still forcing on something that is not a critical economic need, when you have an economic distress, where you would need insurance. But forcing them even more to do it for minor expenses.
Watch it:

In reality, oral contraceptives or “The Pill” range between $35 and $250 for the initial provider visit and the cost of a monthly supply of pills ranges between $15 and $50 a month, which amounts to between $180 and $600 a year depending on woman’s medical coverage. This means some women without insurance coverage for contraception may pay over $850 the first year of their prescription. Other forms of birth control are far more expensive. For instance, the cost for a monthly supply of birth control patches ranges from $15 to $80 dollars, or between $180 and $960 a year. Combined with the doctors visit, uninsured women could spend over $1,200 dollars in the first year.
Santorum has long opposed contraception and has pledged to preach about “the dangers of contraception in this country,” if elected president. “It’s not okay. It’s a license to do things in a sexual realm that is counter to how things are supposed to be,” he has said. The former Pennsylvania senator has also claimed that states have the right to outlaw birth control.

Most Young Americans Want To Buy Health Insurance, But They Can’t Afford It
By Sy Mukherjee

Young Americans want health insurance, need health insurance, and think that health insurance is worth its price. But many — particularly the uninsured — can’t afford it, according to a new poll by the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF).
KFF found that adults between the ages of 18 and 30 overwhelmingly consider having health insurance “very important to them personally,” and that only a quarter of them think they’re healthy enough to forgo coverage.
But many young Americans can’t afford insurance even if they want it. KFF’s survey found that these uninsured Americans’ number one barrier to getting coverage is how prohibitively expensive it is:

Young Americans aren’t alone. The arbitrarily high price of American medical care drives many people to forgo it out of fear of bankruptcy. Over one in three Americans skimp out on medical treatment due its costs, according to Gallup.
Without a health care plan to fall back on, uninsured young adults are worried about incurring unaffordable medical bills. Fifty one percent say they are “very worried” that they can’t afford even routine health care services, and 67 percent say they are “very worried” about the cost of a catastrophic illness or bad accident. Treating a serious injury can cost thousands of dollars depending on the hospital, and young Americans without health coverage would have to foot that bill.
One Obamacare provision has spared 3.1 million Americans from that fate by allowing them to stay on their parents’ insurance plan longer, up to age 26. A May study concluded that saved these young Americans from running up $147 million in high medical bills for treating serious injuries, such as broken bones and traumatic brain injuries, in 2011 alone.
Even more young Americans will experience Obamacare’s fiscal protections as it is fully implemented — particularly those who are too old to qualify for the 26-year-old rule or those who don’t receive insurance through their employer. Early figures indicate that these Americans will be able to buy affordable coverage on Obamacare’s statewide marketplaces, since the health law provides federal subsidies that help pay for insurance premiums. For instance, a young, relatively healthy adult in California who wants health insurance but can’t currently afford it could wind up paying less than $170 per month — or even less if he or she has a lower income — for a “Bronze-level” plan that offers a minimum level of benefits, including for prescription drugs and mental health care.

Insurance Technology Market Overview and Innovation Quadrant — Q1 2017
The following post highlights how Venture Scanner categorizes the Insurance Technology (insurtech) startup landscape, and presents our Innovation Quadrant showing how those categories compare to one another. The data for this post is through January 2017.
Insurance Technology Logo Map
The above sector map organizes the Insurance Technology sector into 14 categories and shows a sampling of companies in each category.
Insurance Technology Innovation Quadrant
Our Innovation Quadrant provides a snapshot of the average funding and average age for the different Insurance Technology categories and how they compare with one another.
Heavyweight: These categories are comprised of companies that have reached maturity with significant financing.
Established: These categories are comprised of companies that have reached maturity with less financing.
Disruptors: These categories are comprised of companies that are less mature with significant financing.
Pioneers: These categories are comprised of companies that are less mature with earlier stages of financing.
The definitions of the Insurance Technology categories are as follows
Auto Insurance: Companies that offer car insurance, including car telematics products which detect your mileage and driving behavior to customize your insurance plan.
Consumer Insurance Management Platforms: Companies that enable consumers to manage their insurance and claims, including mobile apps that allow users to file claims right at the spot of an accident.
Employee Benefit Platforms: Companies that help enterprises build or acquire employee benefits platforms that deliver healthcare and other insurance products to their employees.
Enterprise/Commercial Insurance: Companies that offer insurance plans to businesses, including corporations, startups, and freelancers.
Health/Travel Insurance: Companies that offer health or travel insurance, either for individuals or for businesses.
Insurance Comparison/Marketplace: Companies that serve as a marketplace for consumers to buy insurance of any kind (car to home to health), or compare different insurance providers. These are 3rd party companies that don’t offer insurance plans themselves, but act as a brokerage agent between insurance providers and consumers.
Insurance Data/Intelligence: Companies that collect, process, and analyze data analytics and business intelligence for the insurance industry.
Insurance Education/Resources: Companies that provide educational material and resources that give information about how insurance works.
Insurance Infrastructure/Backend: Companies that help insurance companies with their day-to-day operations, including CRM for agents, communication tools, and claim filing tools.
Insurance User Acquisition: Companies that help insurance companies find and manage new leads and then to acquire those leads as clients.
Life, Home, Property & Casualty Insurance: Companies that offer life, home, and property insurance, as well as other kinds of insurance such as disability and marriage insurance.
P2P Insurance: Companies that offer peer-to-peer insurance, in which a group of policyholders jointly pay for the insurance of an item that they mutually own, share, or rent (such as a car, a house, or media equipment).
Product Insurance: Companies that offer insurance and/or warranties for products that a user purchases, from tech gadgets to diamonds.
Reinsurance: Companies that provide insurance products to other insurance companies, helping them hedge their bets and streamline their costs.
We are currently tracking 1,050 Insurance Technology companies in 14 categories across 54 countries, with a total of $17 Billion in funding. Click here to learn more about the full Insurance Technology report and database.

I continue to be bullish and fasciated with all things do-it yourself in capital markets and the rest of financial services. I believe the Robinhood new user and transaction growth is setting off a transformational era.
A first time stock buyer of Snapchat can buy 1 shares at $23 and change their mind the next day and sell it for $22.90 — losing 10 cents not $16.10 at an online brokerage. In a $200 account you can see how the cost of learning is dropping at an astronomical rate.
Combined with the fact that financial experts are contributing endlessly on social media streams…you will have a massive increase in financial literacy.
The transformation in fintech won’t just take place in capital markets.
The hot topic of the last year in fintech is insurance technology.
I google searched it for you to do some reading of your own.
I have met with a lot of insurance companies over the last few years and their innovation departments to hear about the industry and the opportunities to disrupt and partner.
Some context for how big these Companies are…Geico spends approximately $1 billion a year (5 percent of auto premium sales) and $450 plus to acquire a customer. Insurance companies that use sales agents pay nearly $1,000 per customer. That strategy wont work for millennials or Generation Y, so it’s easy to see why the insurance tech space is hot right now.
I imagine Google and Facebook will have a huge piece of all insurance business 30 years out.
Originally published on howardlindzon.com

The Difference In Selling Insurance Across State Lines
Our guest blogger is Emma Sandoe, a Health Care Researcher at the Center for American Progress Action Fund.

As Democratic and Republican leaders make their final preparations for the February 25th bipartisan health summit, Republicans continue to argue for selling insurance policies across state lines — a provision already in both the House and Senate bills.
 
This weekend David Herszenhorn of the New York Times noted that while Republicans and Democrats may agree on the idea of selling across state lines, their respective paths to accomplishing this goal couldn’t be more different. Some experts argue, if done incorrectly this could become “a race to the bottom.”
 
Republicans argue the current insurance system, in which each state has its own set of regulations, restricts competition in the marketplace with the added barrier of 50 different sets of insurance regulations. Their proposal allows the health insurer to self-designate a “primary state” “whose covered laws shall govern the health insurance issuer” and avoids regulations in other states by allowing insurers to market policies without adhering “to all of the consumer protection laws or restrictions on rate changes of the state.” U.S. territories such as the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa and the Northern Marianas were given the title of “states” in the Republican bill under the definition of a “primary state.” This could lead to insurers finding sanctuary in less regulated havens.
 
Despite claims that selling policies across state lines would serve to expand insurance options and lower costs to consumers, the Congressional Budget Office found older and sicker individuals who continue to purchase in-state expanded coverage plans would likely pay more under the Republican proposal. The ability to sell across state lines coupled with meager benefit standards induces insurers to cover fewer benefits and move their operations to states, or territories, with the least regulation.
 
Rep. John Shadegg (R-AZ), a long time proponent of selling across state lines, argued, “if you turn on the television station at night…you see Allstate and Geico and Progressive and State Farm pounding each other’s heads in…You never see that kind of advertisement for you and I to go out and buy health insurance.” While more competition is needed in the health insurance market, a desire for greater competition should not put benefit standards at risk. Transparent and accessible information on policies, the health insurance exchange, and enforceable fair practices in the health insurance market will go a long way to increase competition without reducing benefits under comprehensive reform.
 
The House and Senate bills, meanwhile, provide for more regulated “compacts” to “facilitate the purchase of individual health insurance coverage across State lines.” The House bill allows residents of one state to buy health coverage from another state and the laws applied would be determined between the states. The Senate bill also allows states to enter “compacts” with other states, but rather than negotiate which laws would apply, the laws from the original state where the policy is issued or written would govern the policy.
Theoretically the plans sold under the Office of Personnel Management would also achieve the goals of selling policies across state lines, although the Congressional Budget Office cast doubts on the chances insurers would participate.

New Report Reveals Health Insurance Industry Pumped $86 Million Into The U.S. Chamber To Kill Reform
By Lee Fang

This morning, Bloomberg reporter Drew Armstrong broke an incredible story revealing that health insurance companies, like UnitedHealth and CIGNA, funneled $86.2 million into the U.S. Chamber of Commerce in 2009 to pay for the Chamber’s multifaceted campaign to kill President Obama’s health reform legislation. In January of this year, the National Journal’s Peter Stone reported that insurers had pumped $20 million into the Chamber for its anti-health reform campaign. Armstrong’s report exposes the true extent to which insurers worked to fool the public and defeat health reform. However, the report also poses new questions about the role of insurance companies in the health reform debate.
Why did insurance companies try to hide their donations to the Chamber’s anti-health reform campaign? Given their own unpopularity and Obama’s pledge to be the first leader to successfully reform America’s broken health system, the health insurance industry hatched a plan to fundamentally deceive the public, the press, and politicians. Instead of fighting reform tooth and nail, the insurance industry worked to manipulate the process and ultimately kill reforms by adopting what ThinkProgress termed “The Duplicitous Campaign.” In public, health insurance lobbyists and executives promised to support reform and work closely with reform advocates. The top health insurance lobbyist, Karen Ignagni, went to the White House early in the reform debate and promised Obama, “You have our commitment to play, to contribute and to help pass health-care reform this year.”
In private, the health insurance industry worked with conservative think tanks and media, right-wing front groups, and highly ideological trade associations like the National Association of Manufacturers and the Chamber to kill the bill. By using third party groups and ideological cover, the health insurance industry sought to trick Americans into hating reform. In September of 2009, while many in the media still believed insurance executives were honestly supporting reform, ThinkProgress released a report detailing the ways in which the health insurance industry secretly worked to undermine the process and poison public opinion (read it here). We also produced a video with health insurance whistle-blower Wendell Potter, who explained how insurers control the debate to defeat reform:

ThinkProgress busted several anti-reform groups, like Conservatives for Patients’ Rights, Coalition to Protect Patients’ Rights and Center for Medicine in the Public Interest as industry-created fronts used to deceive the public. As ThinkProgress also first reported, health insurance companies like WellPoint and Blue Cross Blue Shield paid hundreds of thousands of dollars to anti-reform talking heads like former House Speaker Newt Gingrich. In December of 2009, ThinkProgress produced an exclusive investigation showing how health insurance executives are also secretly working to undermine and undo reform on the state level by orchestrating state-based constitutional challenges to the law. The question for the press and for politicians becomes: we now know that health insurance companies absolutely lied to the public about its role in the reform process in 2009. How much are health insurers funding efforts to repeal the law and weaken health reform regulations?
According to a new report by HCAN, a pro-reform group, health insurers posted a 22 percent increase in profits for 2010, largely by shedding customers. How much of that money — money from health insurance premiums — is being used on right-wing lobbying campaigns instead of actual treatments and health care for the sick?

4 must have for Insurance Companies
CRM software for insurance Agencies
4 Must-Have CRM Tools for Insurance Agencies
Insurance industry is one which is purely services and customer centric. Hence, it can be safely said that the industry runs on Customer Relationship Management tools. Since there is a huge database of customers and agents, imagine the kind of volume needed to manage data. To run an insurance company, a CRM solution would be the first choice for the management, but blind trust on the same would prove disastrous for the company.
Many Solution vendors who provide CRM Solution for Insurance Company might offer the basic modules in their standard packages and might charge for customizations. It is important here for the company to first set an objective and the goal that it wants to achieve with the CRM software. This will help the company to evaluate the vendors better and select faster.
To avoid any implementation pitfalls or mismatch of any expectation and deliverables, here are the 4 must have tools for Insurance Agencies:
Web-based Project Management:
Insurance company battle to find new customers every day and to keep themselves updated with the task or meetings with new customers. For this requirement, they need a CRM solution which can record even the smallest of details while keeping customers updated about any offerings or their policy renewals. Sage CRM is a perfect blend of such services.
Document and Content Management Capabilities:
In an Insurance Company, the main struggle is to manage huge documents on nearly daily basis. In such a scenario, Sage CRM can help you keep your office paperless and automate lot of processes which will lower wastages and avoid any loss of data. These documents can be mapped with each customer and so, you can map and save documents like proposal, product information and other related through Sage CRM itself. You can save the documents related to customers / clients, as well as standard policies related document on the dashboard repository of all the employees so that they know the policy rules before going to the customer.
Mobile and Social Capabilities:
Since mobile and social media are top promotional tools used by all B2C companies, even Insurance Companies are not far behind using the platforms to gain leverage and more customers. While managing Social Platforms is a job of the marketing division, integrating them with your CRM solution will help you not only get deeper insights on the reactions of the users but also map your campaigns to different types of users. In this scenario, your CRM solution should be capable enough to use map and integrate tools to reach out to your prospects and customers. The Social CRM feature of Sage CRM helps to reach your customers on popular media tool like twitter, Facebook and also analyze their reactions towards the campaigns.
Contact Center Optimization:
Sage CRM is has an inbuilt self-service portal which helps to cater the customer requirement as a when required. This customer center module in Sage CRM helps you in getting you to deliver in a timely fashion and be closer to your customers. Automate notifications and updates to be sent to the customers for their payments to have a faster payment and redressal solving cycle.
To know more about what CRM for insurance companies can do for you, SMS SAGE to 56767 or write to us at sales@sagesoftware.co.in
Originally published at www.sagesoftware.co.in.

Saul — the problem with health insurance is not that Companies don’t want to provide it to their workers — it is that they cannot. This is precisely the problem with the current regulation. It cannot discriminate between people who — say work more than 30 hours/week and those who don’t to offer health insurance to only some of them but not all of them. Talk offline with founders of marketplaces with 1099, and they would, for the most part, pay for health insurance for some of the workers that actually work more than a certain number of hours/week/month, etc..

Department of Insurance and Financial Services
The Department of Insurance and Financial Services regulates the insurance and financial services industries in order to protect consumers, strengthen the state’s business climate, and position these industries for economic growth. The governor’s proposed budget for fiscal years 2017 and 2018 recommends total funding of $66.3 million ($150,000 general fund).

Highlights of Governor’s Budget Recommendation
• The governor recommends funding of $37.1 million for financial institutions and insurance evaluation, $14.1 million for enforcement and consumer protection, $9.2 million for department services and information technology, and $5.9 million for insurance and consumer finance licensing.
Funding of $150,000 general fund is recommended to continue to study and analyze the impact of the Healthy Michigan Plan on private market insurance rates.


This Nigerian Insurance Company Is Close To Going Bust

International Energy Insurance is walking on a tight rope looking at its recently released 2015 audited results. It’s board and management will have to take drastic action considering that the Nigerian insurer’s future operation is under immense threat given the impact of a pile of accumulated losses on its balance sheet.
A cursory examination of the company’s 2015 audited financial statement shows the insurer recorded a negative reserve of N13.44 billion compared to N12.61 billion the previous year. The N13.44 billion recurring losses figure are more than total assets of N8.07 billion as December 2015.
Consequently, this resulted in a negative total equity of N2.12 billion in the period under review.
This means the company has recorded more losses than profit throughput its existence. It actually posted a loss after tax of N700.01 million in December 2015, lower than the N2.16 billion in December 2014.
Little wonder such faltering performance enraged investors who questioned the strategies of its management and boards of directors in delivering stellar performance that would magnify shareholders value.
In 2015, the National Insurance Commission (NAICOM), had dissolved the Board of the International Energy Insurance (IEI) following allegations against some directors of the company.
PearlChrix Property’s Limited, the second largest shareholder of the company raised these serious concerns regarding the financial health and status of the company.
This is in connection with International Energy Insurance depleting shareholder’s fund and its ability to remain a going concern after a worsened working capital position has become an increasing threat.
Accounting to the company’s auditors: “The total amount required to settle insurance contract liabilities, trade and other payables, current income tax liabilities and foreign loan liabilities amounted to N9.70 billion while the total amount available to meet the company’s obligation is only N3.70 billion on the basis that they are all realizable within the year leaving a deficit of N6 billion”
“The company also has a deficit of N5.40 billion in its solvency margin and a N5.40 billion in capital adequacy. In effect the company is having serious working capital problems maybe threatened” said auditors of International Energy Insurance.
This company has very little time to turn thing around as it is on the edges of going solvent. If they fail to take drastic action, then NAICOM might do it for them.

Biotech Giant Will Pay Massive Settlement For Illegally Promoting Drugs And Committing Insurance Fraud
By Sy Mukherjee

In a case that encompasses illegal drug promotion, corporate kickbacks to doctors, and pre-meditated Medicare fraud, Los Angeles Times reports that biotech and pharmaceutical conglomerate Amgen will be fined $762 million after pleading guilty to allegations of improper drug marketing.
Kassie Westmoreland, a former Amgen employee and a whistleblower in the suit, was one of several people to charge that Amgen promoted the anemia-treatment drug Aranesp for off-label use and overfilled doctors’ promotional samples of the drug. In a brazen twist, Westmoreland also claims that the company orchestrated a collusive scheme to allow doctors to fraudulently profit off of their patients’ drug benefits:
[Westmoreland’s] suit charged that Amgen overfilled vials of Aranesp to supply doctors with extra medicine at no charge. She alleged the company then encouraged doctors to bill Medicare and private insurers for this surplus amount, reaping them extra profit. Amgen pursued this strategy to take business away from Procrit, a popular anemia drug sold by Johnson & Johnson, according to the suit.
The Westmoreland case cited internal spreadsheets used by Amgen sales representatives to allegedly show doctors how much more money they could make from the overfills.
“Amgen provided extra product in the Aranesp vials as a liquid kickback that doctors could then cash in with federal and state governments through Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements,” said Charles Kester, a Calabasas attorney who represents Westmoreland along with law firms in Boston and Washington, D.C. “Amgen is being held to account in a serious way for its choices to market this drug unlawfully.”
Amgen’s penalties highlight the fact that most federal health care settlements stem from Medicare fraud and pharmaceutical misconduct. While doctors can prescribe drugs for off-label use, it is illegal for pharmaceutical companies to advertise drugs for purposes other than what the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved. But settlements of this kind — and the government’s ability to crack down on drug makers’ practices that may threaten public health — could soon be a thing of the past.
A recent appellate court ruling in favor of the pharmaceutical industries’ right to promote their products as they see fit has set the stage for a Supreme Court showdown over drug makers’ First Amendment rights — and opens up big questions about how stringently the FDA can regulate Big Pharma.

The Rise Of Catholic Insurance Plans Raises Questions About Contraceptive Coverage
BY JULIE ROVNER
Catholic and other religious hospitals and universities have been arguing in federal court for much of the past two years that they shouldn’t have to offer or facilitate birth control as part of their employee health plans because it violates their religious beliefs.
But what happens when the insurance company is itself Catholic? It turns out that Catholic health plans have for years been arranging for outside firms to provide contraceptive coverage to their enrollees.
That’s because such coverage has long been required by state laws or sought by non-religious employers the religious health plans serve.
Now the federal health law requires most health insurance plans, including all new plans in the individual and small group markets, to provide contraceptive coverage at no out-of-pocket cost to women.
That divergence between the Catholic court claim that any link to contraceptive coverage is forbidden and the actions of Catholic insurance plans is likely to draw more attention as more large Catholic hospital systems add insurance plans to their portfolios.
Already a bishop in Arkansas is raising questions about one of the insurers in his state.
No one is keeping track of just how many Catholic health plans are entering the insurance market and selling to non-Catholics. The latest entry is Catholic Health Initiatives, the nation’s fifth largest nonprofit health system, with facilities in 18 states.
Juan Serrano, who heads CHI’s new insurance subsidiary, Prominence Health, said in an interview that over the next year and a half Prominence plans to “expand our health plan footprint into additional Catholic Health Initiative markets…where they make the most sense.”
He said that “as relates to the mandated benefits that are required in the marketplace, we are taking the same position that has been taken by other Catholic health plans, and it is to cede or contract with a third-party administrator who will administer the ERD-related benefits in an arm’s length manner.”
ERD refers to the Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care, a documentfrom the Conference of Catholic Bishops that among other things makes contraception off limits for Catholic institutions.
While CHI’s third-party strategy might please health law advocates, the bishop who heads the Diocese of Little Rock, Ark., raised a red flag when the company purchased QualChoice, its first commercial plan in that state, last spring.
“Having given this matter serious thought and prayer, I am not fully convinced by CHI’s reasoning that their acquisition of QualChoice will pose no moral or ethical conflicts,” Bishop Anthony Taylor said in a statement.
MergerWatch, a reproductive health advocacy group that tracks deals involving secular and religious health institutions, is keeping a close eye on Catholic plans in the commercial market.
“We’re now seeing more and more of these plans moving into the commercial market in a big way,” said Lois Uttley, director of the group. “Under the Affordable Care Act, these plans are supposed to be covering contraception. So they have to figure out some way to get that to their enrollees, despite their religious objections to contraception.”
MergerWatch has been closely watching how Fidelis Care, a Catholic-owned insurer that this year was the second-most popular plan on the New York state health exchange, is handling reproductive health services.
Fidelis has arranged for a third party to provide women’s reproductive health services, although that’s not clear on the plan’s website. In its handbook for healthcare providersFidelis explains it “has elected not to offer all reproductive and family planning services, including abortion, sterilization, and artificial contraception, as a standard benefit nor to receive premium dollars from the State of New York for such services.”
Instead, the company “will inform these same providers that the New York State of Health Marketplace has approved Unified IPA, LLC to provide New York State of Health marketplace-mandated family planning services, independent of Fidelis Care.” The online marketplace operates under the health law, offering competing plans to people who generally don’t have approved employer-based coverage.
A spokeswoman for Fidelis wrote in an email that health plan members need not worry about getting special access to the outside insurer because “the process is seamless for members. Providers simply bill the outside firm.”
Mike Elliott, a principal with Unified IPA, the outside firm, says he contracts with the same providers Fidelis does, and works with the same pharmacy benefit firms to ensure that prescriptions are filled without Fidelis having to participate.
“From the member’s perspective they’re getting to see the same doctor, they have the same benefit package…and we utilize the same ID number as the health plan,” said Elliott, who says he has been providing reproductive health services to religious health plans for nearly three decades.
With Fidelis, that process has not been exactly seamless, says MergerWatch. Uttley said her group called several health plans asking about contraceptive coverage, and the response from Fidelis “was particularly confusing. The customer service woman said, ‘Well, Fidelis covers contraception if you need it to regulate yourself,’ whatever that means. If you need it for other reasons you have to call this IPA.”
That’s troublesome, said Uttley, because “that’s confusing even to a sophisticated insurance consumer used to having health insurance, and what we have now coming into the marketplace is a lot of people who have never had insurance. It’s enough of a challenge to get them to understand how health insurance works without having this wrinkle in it.”
Another problem for the group is that Fidelis, unlike many other non-religious health plans, refuses to allow Planned Parenthood into its network of covered providers, “not even for prenatal or primary care,” Uttley said. “It’s not clear to us that women enrolling in Fidelis in New York understand they can’t use that coverage at a Planned Parenthood if that’s been their primary source of family planning services in the past.”
In Arkansas, the bishop’s concerns remain unresolved. Taylor sought clarification from the Vatican, and according to diocesan spokesman Dennis Lee, “Bishop Taylor has received a substantive response from the Vatican regarding CHI’s acquisition of QualChoice, and he is actively involved in on-going, private discussions with CHI on how best to comply with the Vatican’s response.”
The issues are clearer to other Catholic health plans that don’t have to meet the needs of non-Catholics in the commercial insurance market. They’re arguing in court that any participation with the contraceptive mandate is forbidden.
The Little Sisters of the Poor religious order, which provides long-term care services with employees insured by Christian Brothers Services, is rejecting the Obama administration’s newest policy: allowing religious employers to notify the government, instead of their insurer, that they have a religious objection to providing contraceptive coverage. “Any provision of the Mandate’s services through the plan…would violate the Christian Brothers’ and Little Sisters’ faith,” the lawyers argue.
In the case of Christian Brothers, the administration argues that because it is itself a religious plan, it is exempt from the requirements anyway.

Michele Bachmann Thinks People ‘Choose’ To Not Have Health Insurance, Not Because They Can’t Afford It
By Amanda Peterson Beadle

The Affordable Care Act expands health insurance to the millions of uninsured Americans by making it more affordable and regulating the abusive practices of health insurance companies. But conservatives have attacked it as government overreach, with Rep. Michele Bachmann (R-MN) as one of the loudest critics. After the last day of Supreme Court hearings about the health care reform law, Bachmann told Fox News’ Sean Hannity that people are uninsured not because they can’t afford insurance, but because they simply choose to be uninsured:
BACHMANN: One argument that the government was trying to make is that somehow health care is uniquely different. That government can regulate it because everyone participates. Health insurance is not uniquely different. It’s still an opportunity that some people choose to engage in, but 40 million people do not. And the premise was made that people don’t buy insurance because they can’t afford it. That’s not true. There are people who just decide they want to roll the dice and take their chances that they won’t need insurance.
Watch her comments:

Bachmann’s assumption that 40 million people “choose” to not have health insurance downplays the plight that people can face trying to find affordable health insurance in the face of rising costs. For the past decade, the number of people uninsured has risen each year, and working families make up 80 percent of those who have no health insurance. And young adults make up the largest share of those who are uninsured.
Instead of acknowledging this growing problem, Bachmann has attacked the Affordable Care Act, the very thing that could help slow these costs and expand access to health care.

Insurance Company Drops Cancer Patient And Veteran Because He Accidentally Underpaid By Two Cents
By Zaid Jilani

One of the worst abuses of the private health insurance industry is the practice of denying claims to pay for necessary care or revoking the coverage of policyholders for frivolous reasons. A Vietnam veteran from Thornton, Colorado, is the latest victim of this practice.
Vietnam vet Ronald Flanagan has been battling cancer for more than two years. Two weeks ago, Flanagan was getting prepped for a bone biopsy at the local Exempla Rock Creek Medical Center. But at the last minute, his wife called the hospital and told them to stop the procedure because she had just received notice that they no longer have insurance. The reason why? The couple had accidentally underpaid their insurer by two pennies and it decided to drop them from their plan:
Two pennies. That’s the difference between a potentially life-saving surgery, and a dropped insurance plan. Those two cents could cost Vietnam veteran Ronald Flanagan everything. “Everybody we talk to is very surprised that two cents is enough to do this,” said Flanagan.
 
It was an innocent enough mistake, according to Ron’s wife, Frances Flanagan. “If I only had just hit the nine instead of the seven,” Frances said. When she was paying their monthly health insurance premium online in November, Frances swapped a 7 for a 9, leaving their $328.69 payment two cents short.
In a statement provided to a local news station, the couple’s insurer, Ceridian Cobra Services, explained, “Since the payment was not full, it fit into the definition in the regulations of an ‘insufficient payment’ … Ceridian understands nothing is more important than one’s health.” Local station ABC 7 interviewed the Flanagans about their plight. “I felt that it was all my fault,” said Mrs. Flanagan, who made the accounting error, choking back tears. Watch it:

The recently passed health care law — which congressional Republicans are unanimously trying to repeal — includes a whole host of protections that would rein in the ability for health insurers to drop patients for frivolous reasons like this. If Republicans are successful, these protections would disappear.
However, in the long run, it’s worth noting that one of the best ways to prevent the situation that the Flanagans are in is to offer them access to a public, not-for-profit system like Medicare, which has a higher approval rating than private insurance, runs more efficiently than any private insurer, and that most Americans want to be able to join.
Update:
After intense media pressure, the insurer gave in and returned their benefits to the Flanagans.

No-Fault Auto Insurance Laws in Utah

In order to prevent a vast amount of frivolous lawsuits regarding auto accidents, many states have chosen to implement no-fault auto insurance laws. Currently in the United States there are 12 states, including Utah, which have a no-fault based system.
No-fault car insurance places the burden of proper insurance on the injured party. This makes it so that minor claims cannot reap big rewards by bringing forward personal injury claims.
When auto accidents do occur in Utah, the drivers do not have to show that the accident was someone else’s fault in order to receive compensation for the accident. The people who are injured in the crash rely on their own insurance coverage to cover the damages.
These insurance companies are required to pay upwards of $3,000 in personal injury protection (PIP) benefits regardless of who is at fault for the auto accidents. This means that those who are injured in an accident need to file a “first-party” claim with their insurance company.
If one sustains serious injuries that accumulate to more than $3,000 in medical bills, they can, in limited situations, seek compensation from those who caused the accident. Utah is one of the seven states with a monetary threshold. This means an injured party can file a personal injury suit if their medical expenses meet a certain dollar threshold.
Another situation in which one can seek damages from auto accidents, and pursue a liability case, is when a serious injury threshold has been met. The serious injuries that meet the serious injury threshold in Utah are permanent disability, permanent impairment, permanent disfigurement or dismemberment.
While the no-fault laws do apply to those seeking damages from personal injury, they do not apply to property damage. This means that insurance claims in auto accidents that cause property damage are still based on fault. If one is found to be at fault for property damages in an auto accident, their insurance will have to cover the cost of damages.
As Utah is a no-fault state, uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage (UIM) is required to be included in each car insurance policy. Auto insurance companies are obligated to include this UIM policy, but you can opt out of this coverage in writing. However, this coverage is recommended as it protects drivers who are involved in an auto accident with someone who is uninsured or underinsured.
Since the guidelines and regulations for no-fault states can be somewhat unclear, you should seek legal advice if you have been in an auto accident and want to make a no fault claim.
Sydney Smith is a legal writer reporter for Fusion 360, a Content Marketing Agency. Information provided by Robert J Debry.
* Image Credit: Wikipedia

The Future of the Children’s Health Insurance Program Is Unclear
BY MARY AGNES CAREY
The Children’s Health Insurance Program, a joint federal-state program known as CHIP, has helped cut in half the number of uninsured children since being enacted less than two decades ago, but its future is in doubt due to limited funding in the federal health law of 2010. A year from now, CHIP will run out of money. Some advocates for the program want the federal government to finance CHIP for another four years, while other experts have suggested two would suffice. The Senate Finance Committee’s Subcommittee on Health Care will hold a hearing on the issue Tuesday.
President Barack Obama signs the 2009 reauthorization of the Children’s Health Insurance Program (Photo by Win McNamee/Getty Images).
KHN’s Mary Agnes Carey answers some frequently asked questions about the program.
Q: What is the Children’s Health Insurance Program?
A: CHIP was created in 1997 to help provide insurance for low-income children whose families earned too much money to qualify for Medicaid. It provides coverage to 8 million children at a cost of about $13 billion. The federal government provides capped funding to states for the program and some states use the money to expand their children’s Medicaid programs, while others keep the programs separate.
State eligibility rules for the program vary, from 138 percent of poverty to more than four timesthe poverty level. Together, Medicaid and CHIP provide health insurance to one in every three children in the U.S. and brought the uninsured rate for children down from 14 to 7 percent since it began.
Q: How did the Affordable Care Act affect CHIP?
A: While the health law continues CHIP through 2019, it extends CHIP’s funding only through Sept. 30, 2015. If Congress approves funding beyond that time, CHIP’s matching rates – the amount it gives states to pay physicians, hospitals and other providers for services – would increase to as much as 94 percent from the current average of about 70 percent. The law also requires states to maintain the current eligibility for children in Medicaid and CHIP until 2019.
The law also affects eligibility for Medicaid, which will have some effect on CHIP. States must expand Medicaid to 138 percent of the federal poverty line for all children up to age 19. But under the Supreme Court’s decision on the ACA, that expansion is optional for adults and not all states have taken that step for adults. Prior to the law’s passage, the eligibility level for children varied by age, although the federal minimum standard for children 6 to 18 was 100 percent of the poverty line, according to the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured (KHN is an editorially independent program of the foundation).
The health law also requires states to shift children ages 6 to 19 in families with incomes between 100 percent of poverty and 138 percent of poverty out of CHIP and into Medicaid as of Jan. 1 of this year, with states still receiving the enhanced matching rate for coverage of these children.
Q: What are the concerns about CHIP’s future?
A: Advocates for children are concerned that the health law’s provisions, such as premium subsidies to help low-income families buy private insurance, will not provide coverage that is as generous as children now receive in CHIP. They argue that some of these families will not be able to afford to seek services even after getting subsidized insurance because they may not be able to pay the deductibles and copayments.
According to estimates from the Finance subcommittee, if the program is not funded beyond next September, as many as 2 million children won’t have access to affordable health care. One analysis found that cost-sharing would increase and the number of child-specific services covered would decline if millions of children now enrolled in CHIP were shifted to private coverage through the health law’s insurance exchanges.
There’s also concern that if CHIP were not continued, some children now eligible for the program may not qualify for coverage in the health law’s online marketplaces or the Medicaid program. The health law precludes families from getting subsidies if they are offered “affordable” coverage at work — but that standard is determined by weighing the cost of an individual policy against 9.5 percent of household income. That eliminates many low-income families.
In addition, children’s advocates note, not all states are participating in the health law’s Medicaid expansion so some children could lose CHIP coverage and not be eligible for Medicaid.
Q: What might Congress do?
A: Two of CHIP’s creators, Sen. Jay Rockefeller, D-W.Va., and Rep. Henry Waxman, D-Calif., have sponsored legislation to fund the program through Sept. 30, 2019. Both are retiring at the end of the year. Advocates hope the legislation can pass in the lame-duck session after the November elections, but it may well wait until next year. The Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission, a congressional advisory group, has recommended a two–year extension to give lawmakers time to address concerns about affordability of coverage for low income families and determine whether the health law’s exchange plans are an appropriate alternative for CHIP kids.

Study: People Receiving Unemployment Insurance Work Harder To Find Jobs
By Alex Seitz-Wald
A new study from Congress’ Joint Economic Committee (JEC) debunks the prevailing conservative notion that Unemployment Insurance (UI) dissuades people from looking for a job. “On the contrary,” the report finds, “beneficiaries of federal UI benefits have spent more time searching for work than those who were ineligible for UI benefits.” “In fact, since Congress enacted federal unemployment benefits, time spent looking for a job has tripled among the long‐term unemployed who are out of work as a result of job loss,” the report adds.
As this chart shows, while unemployment rose during the recession, people who received UI benefits spent more time looking for work than those who didn’t qualify for the federal program:

And this makes sense. Federal unemployment insurance requires recipients to actively look for new work, and also gives them more flexibility to do. Someone with no job and no UI benefits will likely have to focus first on paying bills on a day-to-day basis before finding a job for the long-term.
And while some studies have attributed UI benefits to marginal increases (less than 2 weeks) in the length someone remains unemployed, the JEC report concludes that this minor effect is “simply because some of those unemployed workers would have otherwise dropped out of the labor force, discouraged by lack of job prospects” were it not for their UI benefits.

North Carolina Governor Signs ‘Unprecedented’ Gutting Of Unemployment Insurance
By Travis Waldron

North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory (R) today signed a law that imposes severe cuts to his state’s unemployment insurance program, a change that will also cost jobless workers in the state access to the federal unemployment compensation program.
McCrory’s signature earned him a rebuke from the National Employment Law Project, which said in a release that the law will result in “the most severe cuts to both state and federal unemployment insurance of any state in the nation”:
These heartless cuts, in the state with the fifth-highest jobless rate in the nation, at 9.2 percent, show a shocking disregard for 400,000 unemployed North Carolinians and their families, many of whom will now go from struggling to barely make ends meet to outright struggling to survive. The immediate pain of these cuts will fall on North Carolinians unfortunate enough to lose work through no fault of their own in a weak economy where jobs are scarce. But the entire state will take a hit from the loss of hundreds of millions of dollars in spending at local businesses that would’ve boosted the local and state economies.
The law reduces the maximum benefit allowed from $535 a week to $350 while cutting the number of weeks an unemployed worker is eligible for the program from 26 to 20. As a result, 170,000 jobless North Carolinians will also lose access to $780 million in federal unemployment funds. The average unemployed worker in the United States has been off the job for 35 weeks, meaning many jobless workers will now face the prospect of searching for a new job without access to a safety net program.
Republican state senators have touted the law as “re-employment” program, even though research suggests that workers who receive unemployment benefits search harder for jobs than those who don’t. McCrory, meanwhile, praised the fiscal responsibility of the law, which will allow North Carolina to pay back money owed to the federal government a measly three years earlier than it would have under the old program.

Cyber Harmony = Cyber Insurance and Cyber Essentials (Security Alliance)
Original by Security Alliance, here.
A new report has been published on the joint initiatives between government and the insurance sector to tackle cyber risk.
Last year 81% of large UK businesses and 60% of small companies suffered a cyber security breach. A report published on 23 March by HM Government and Marsh, one of the UK’s leading insurance brokers and risk advisors, announces new joint initiatives between government and the insurance sector to help firms get to grips with cyber risk; to establish cyber insurance as part of firms’ cyber toolkits and cement London as the global centre for cyber risk management.
The report, ‘UK cyber security: the role of insurance in managing and mitigating the risk’, has been produced in collaboration with the UK’s insurance market and a number of top UK companies. It aims to make the UK a world centre for cyber security insurance. In particular, it highlights the exposure of firms to cyber attacks among their suppliers with a key agreement that participating insurers will include the government’s Cyber Essentials certification as part of their risk assessment for small and medium businesses.
Cyber threats are estimated to cost the UK economy billions of pounds each year with the cost of cyber attacks nearly doubling between 2013 and 2014. The report found that, while larger firms have taken some action to make themselves more cyber-secure, they face an escalating threat as they become more reliant on online distribution channels and as attackers grow more sophisticated. It issues a call to arms for insurers and insurance brokers to simplify and raise awareness of their cyber insurance offering and ensure that firms understand the extent of their coverage against cyber attack.
Companies are recommended to stop viewing cyber largely as an IT issue and focus on it as a key commercial risk affecting all parts of its operations. The product of collaboration between government and the sector following a summit held last November, the report recommends that firms examine the different forms of cyber attacks they face, to stress-test themselves against them and to put in place business-wide recovery plans.
The report also notes a significant gap in awareness around the use of insurance, with around half of firms interviewed being unaware that insurance was available for cyber risk. Other surveys suggest that despite the growing concern among UK companies about the threat of cyber attacks, less than 10% of UK companies have cyber insurance protection even though 52% of CEOs believe that their companies have some form of coverage in place.
John Beale, CREST Cyber Essentials Project Manager, states “This joint initiative is another great example of UK Government working hand-in-hand with the commercial sector to cement the UK’s reputation as a secure environment for business and a global centre for cyber risk management. This builds on the early success of the Cyber Essentials Scheme and recognises cyber insurance as an increasingly important cyber risk management tool, to be implemented alongside more technical cyber security controls.
“The report provides a strong and much welcomed endorsement of the Cyber Essentials Scheme from the insurance industry, which for the first time has an easily accessible standard on which it can layer cyber insurance products. We look forward to working closely with the insurance sector to integrate these services to the benefit of businesses operating in the UK.”

Huge Insurance Company Cites Climate Change As Reason For Divesting From Coal
AXA, one of the world’s largest insurance companies, is dropping its coal investments. CREDIT: AP
Citing climate change as a major threat, one of the world’s largest insurance companies has pledged to drop its remaining investment in coal assets while tripling its investment in green technologies.
At a business and climate change conference held this week in Paris, AXA — France’s largest insurer — announced that it would sell €500 million ($559 million) in coal assets by the end of 2015, while increasing its “green investments” in things like renewable energy, green infrastructure, and green bonds to €3 billion ($3.3 billion) by 2020.
During the announcement on Friday, AXA’s chief executive Henri de Castries spoke about the threat that climate change poses to the environment, and the responsibility of insurance companies to deal with those threats. Last year, AXA paid over €1 billion ($1.1 billion) globally in weather-related insurance claims, citing climate change as a “core business issue” already driving an increase in weather-related risks.
“The facts are undeniable. If we think we can live in a world where temperatures would have increased by more than 2 degrees [Celsius] we’re just fooling ourselves,” de Castries said.
Later, in an interview with Bloomberg Television, de Castries called climate change “an extremely large risk.”
“Insurers are the mirror of what happens in the economy and in the society,” he said. “We try to increase what we do on the prevention side.”
A study published in Nature in January found that in order to limit global warming to 2°C, 80 percent of the world’s current coal reserves would need to remain unused from 2010 and 2050.
AXA’s move away from fossil fuel assets broadens support for the divestment movement, which until now has largely been lead by churches, universities, and socially conscious investment funds. According to the Financial Times, AXA is the first global financial institution to divest from investments in coal companies.
“It is our responsibility, as a long term institutional investor, to consider carbon as a risk and to accompany the global energy transition,” the company said in a press release. “Divesting from coal contributes both to de-risking our investment portfolios and to building better alignment with AXA’s corporate responsibility strategy to build a stronger, safer and more sustainable society.”
In advance of the Paris climate talks in December, de Castries urged other financial institutions to consider different metrics for measuring the value of long-term investments.
“As long as the ‘systemic risk’ of carbon is not correctly embedded into regulatory frameworks … it will always be a story of a few responsible actors doing their best within a broader financial system that is not designed for sustainability,” he said. “[We] need to launch a serious discussion on financial regulation and greater incentives to focus on long term investments.”

@madewithangular: “US health insurance exchange uses @AngularJS on their site”

Official site of Affordable Care Act. Enroll now for 2016 coverage starting November 1, 2015. See health coverage choices, ways to save today, how law affects you. read more

Denial Rates Exceed 20 Percent In Individual Health Insurance Market
By Igor Volsky

Kaiser Health News’ Phil Galewitz examines the denial rates for insurance policies purchased in the individual market — published for the first time as a result of the provisions in the Affordable Care Act — and finds that insurers turn down applicants for coverage at different rates depending on geographical location and for almost any reason. For instance, a review of the 20 most populous states find that “denial rates routinely exceed 20 percent and often are much higher” and seem to contradict industry claims to the contrary:
The information provides fresh evidence of the challenges facing people buying individual health insurance. It also shows the likelihood of whether consumers are approved for a policy depends on which state they live in and the insurer they choose.
Denial rates can vary widely within individual states. In Georgia, for example, Aetna’s denial rate is 15 percent compared with 47percent for Kaiser Permanente and 67 percent for John Alden Life Insurance. […]
Using the data from the website, a Government Accountability Office study of 459 insurers published earlier this year found an average of 19 percent of applicants nationally were denied coverage. But the study showed a wide range of denial rates. A quarter of insurers had denial rates of 15 percent or below and a quarter had rates of 40 percent or higher.
A recent government analysis found that “50 to 129 million (19 to 50 percent of) non-elderly Americans have some type of pre-existing health condition” and would have a hard time enrolling in individual insurance or finding an affordable coverage option. Under the new health law, insurers will be prohibited from denying coverage due to pre-existing conditions or imposing waiting limits on less profitable applicants. Still enterprising issuers will engineer new ways to avoid taking on less healthy patients who spend more on care than they contribute through premium dollars, meaning that regulators and lawmakers have to remain vigilant of industry cherry picking if the sickest Americans are to have access to the coverage they need.

How Insurance Companies Can Discriminate Against Some Americans Simply Based On Their Genes
By Sy Mukherjee

Underscoring the complexity of protecting consumers in an age of accelerating technological innovation, NPR reports that some insurance companies specializing in life insurance and long-term care can choose to discriminate against Americans based on their genetic makeup — and the companies could even subject prospective customers to genetic testing.
Thanks to the 2007 Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA) successfully championed by Rep. Louise Slaughter (D-NY), health insurers cannot use a patient’s genetic information in order to hike their premium rates or curb benefits. “There were countless people in this country who were not eligible for insurance at all, simply by the way they were born,” Slaughter told NPR.
But GINA does not extend to the types of supplemental insurance that Americans predisposed to genetically-linked, degenerative diseases like Parkinson’s or Alzheimer’s are likely to purchase, leaving consumers’ premiums susceptible to their genome and pushing essential long-term care costs onto patients:
“GINA was a fabulous accomplishment,” says Robert Green, a researcher in the genetics department at Harvard Medical School. “It was long in coming and much needed. But I think that it was not perfect.”
Green oversaw a study that examined how people react after they learn they have ApoE4, a gene associated with Alzheimer’s. He found that people who discover they have the gene are five times more likely than the average person to go out and buy long-term-care insurance.[…]
Green says it’s especially ironic that GINA does not apply to long-term-care insurance policies, since they cover the costs of nursing homes, assisted living facilities, home health aides and other things that people with Alzheimer’s disease often need to use.
Long-term care insurers assert that not being able to incorporate information about consumers’ genetic dispositions into their premium rates would make their businesses unsustainable. It’s true that Americans who need long-term care are almost certain to be sicker and, therefore more costly to their insurance companies, than those with standard health coverage. But on the other hand, the services covered under such insurance plans — such as home assistance and health aides — are far more rudimentary than the complex and specialized medical treatments covered under standard insurance, so permanently charging Americans higher premiums because of their genetics ends up being excessive and discriminatory.
Other than extending GINA protections to long-term care and life insurance, lawmakers could also address the disparity by requiring health insurance plans to have more long-term care options, perhaps by making such care an “essential health benefit” under Obamacare.
And the issue of human genetics is likely to remain at the forefront of policy debates for the foreseeable future. The Supreme Court is already slated to hear a case on whether or not corporations can patent the detection of certain cancer-causing genes.

Insurance Technology Startup Exit Activity — Q4 2016
The following two graphs show exit activity in the Insurance Technology sector. The graphics include data through October 2016.

The above graph summarizes the number of exits (acquisitions and IPOs) in each Insurance Technology category. The Insurance Infrastructure category is leading the sector with 20 exits, followed by the Insurance Comparison and Life & Home Insurance categories.

The above graph summarizes the number of exits (acquisitions and IPOs) in the Insurance Technology sector by year. 2016 leads the sector with 17 exit events, followd by 2014 with 12 exit events.
We are currently tracking 1020 Insurance Technology companies in 14 categories across 54 countries, with a total of $17B in funding. Click here to learn more about the full Insurance Technology landscape report and database.

7 States Cut Unemployment Insurance, Costing Jobless Workers Federal Benefits Too
By Travis Waldron

A combination of federal and state unemployment insurance programs kept 2.3 million Americans out of poverty in 2011, mitigating some of the negative effects the Great Recession had on jobless workers. But even as unemployment remains stubbornly high, several states are taking the axe to their unemployment programs, and the result is that recipients are losing federal unemployment insurance too.
Seven states have reduced the length of their unemployment programs from 26 weeks, the standard since the 1950s, by as much as 14 weeks, according to a new policy paper from the National Employment Law Project. But because federal benefits depend on the number of weeks offered at the state level, those cuts are also costing workers access to the federal program. In those states, five of which have unemployment rates higher than the federal level, those cuts are costing individual recipients as much as $5,000, according to NELP:

The average jobless worker has been unemployed for 35 weeks, and 40 percent of unemployed workers have been out of a job for at least 27 weeks, meaning the cuts will hammer large numbers of the unemployed in these states. While opponents of unemployment insurance decry the “culture of dependency” the program creates, research shows that recipients work harder to find a new job than those who don’t have access to the program.
America’s unemployment program, stingy as it is, also has benefits for the economy: the Congressional Budget Office estimated that failure to extend the federal program at the beginning of the year would have cost the country 300,000 jobs.

Insurance Companies Seek To Bypass Obamacare To Make Americans Pay More For Their Coverage
By Sy Mukherjee

Many Obamacare provisions are intended to protect Americans from the private insurance industry, such as measures to prevent insurers from denying coverage to Americans with pre-existing conditions and to keep rising insurance premium rates in check. Nevertheless, as the New York Times reports, some of America’s largest insurers are exploiting a lack of stringent oversight in Obamacare to hike their premiums by double-digits anyway.
Insurers like Aetna and Anthem Blue Cross are requesting rate hikes as steep as 26 percent — amounting to hundreds of dollars that Americans will be forced to pay in higher premiums every month — in states such as California and Florida, and there is little that states can currently do to stop them:
Critics, like Dave Jones, the California insurance commissioner and one of two health plan regulators in that state, said that without a federal provision giving all regulators the ability to deny excessive rate increases, some insurance companies can raise rates as much as they did before the law was enacted.
“This is business as usual,” Mr. Jones said. “It’s a huge loophole in the Affordable Care Act,” he said.
While Mr. Jones has not yet weighed in on the insurers’ most recent requests, he is pushing for a state law that will give him that authority. Without legislative action, the state can only question the basis for the high rates, sometimes resulting in the insurer withdrawing or modifying the proposed rate increase.
While Obamacare does require state regulators to review any rate increase request above 10 percent, it does not endow those regulators with any meaningful veto power. Such rate-setting policies are left to states’ discretion, and although 37 states may currently negotiate or reject insurers’ desired hikes, some states with large markets — such as California — do not have this ability.
Large insurers claim that the hikes are necessary in order to keep up with general medical inflation. But since medical inflation has actually been relatively low in recent years, this claim falls flat. Insurers may actually be raising their rates in an attempt to counteract other Obamacare consumer protection measures such as the “80/20 rule” that requires insurance companies to spend at least 80 percent of the premiums they charge on actual care rather than their profits or overhead. In 2014, Obamacare will also end the practice of medical “underwriting” — taking a consumer’s current health into consideration when setting his or her premium rates — so insurance companies may be trying to lock in higher rates on sicker Americans while they still can.
Fortunately, the 80/20 rule — which has already put over $1.5 billion in insurance rebates back in consumers’ pockets — will help ensure that Americans are refunded some of their money if the latest round of rate hikes are excessive. But the only way to ensure that Americans are not held hostage to the whims of private insurers is to expand state regulators’ ability to negotiate and control premium rates.
And lawmakers are quite aware of the discrepancy. Three years ago, Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-CA) introduced the Health Insurance Rate Authority Act of 2010 in an effort to give regulators more control over insurance rate hikes, but the bill died in committee. President Obama has also called for greater federal oversight of insurance rates.

New Illinois Law Mandates Catastrophic Insurance Coverage For High School Athletes
CREDIT: CHICAGO TRIBUNE
By Travis Waldron
Illinois Gov. Pat Quinn (D) signed a law Monday that will require all high schools in the state to provide athletes with catastrophic injury coverage in the event of a major injury. The law, dubbed “Rocky’s Law,” was inspired by and is named for Rasul “Rocky” Clark, who was paralyzed during a football game in 2000.
Clark, who died in 2007, received medical care under a $5 million policy the school had taken out, but until now, those policies weren’t mandatory. The coverage will cost schools about $5 per athlete, according to estimates, but it will provide major benefits to injured athletes, the Associated Press explained:
The coverage will require a small fee from students but will provide major coverage benefits to injured athletes, the Associated Press explained:
The law says that a school’s minimum policy will cover $3 million in aggregate benefits or five years of coverage — whatever comes first — for injuries that total medical expenses over $50,000. The law includes public and private schools and state officials estimate that the cost of the coverage will be no more than $5 a student. Currently, some schools carry insurance for athletes, but it hasn’t been mandatory. The Illinois High School Association provides students with this catastrophic insurance for state tournaments.
State Sen. Napoleon Harris (D), a former NFL player, sponsored the legislation. “These students’ lives are dramatically changed in cases of catastrophic injuries, and they deserve access to health care coverage,” Harris told the AP.
In 2012, there were nearly 7.7 million Americans playing high school sports; the Illinois law, which applies to both private and public schools, will cover nearly 350,000 athletes, according to the state’s latest participation figures. Injuries like Clark’s are most common in football, where about 1 of every 100,000 high school players suffers a serious spinal cord injury. Nearly 50,000 Illinoisans and more than 1 million Americans play high school football each year.

Bobby Jindal’s Obamacare Replacement Could Kick Millions Off Their Insurance Plans
Gov. Bobby Jindal (R-LA) CREDIT: AP PHOTO/MANUEL BALCE CENETA
By Igor Volsky
Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal (R) unveiled a new health care plan on Wednesday, promising to repeal the Affordable Care Act and offer real conservative alternatives to President Obama’s health care proposal. But the initiative, which borrows heavily from GOP plans introduced over the last 20 years, would cause millions of Americans to lose their existing health care plans, exposing Jindal to the very same criticism he has deployed against Obama.
“[H]undreds of thousands of Americans, maybe even over a million Americans learning they’re not going to be able to continue in their current insurance,” Jindal told Fox News in October of 2013. “I think you’re going to see more and more frustration build [around Obamacare], more and more Democrats and Republicans calling for delays, for repeals.”
But Jindal’s “Freedom and Empowerment Plan” could prove just as frustrating, leading millions of Americans to lose their existing coverage in at least two ways: 1) by repealing the Affordable Care Act, and 2) treating employer-sponsored coverage and nongroup insurance equally in the tax code. The first would dramatically upend the health care market and cause at least 10 million people — signed up for insurance through the new marketplaces, Medicaid expansion, and the remaining individual market — to lose insurance. The second would likely lead many businesses to stop offering coverage altogether.
Currently, the 149 million nonelderly people who obtain coverage through their jobs don’t pay taxes on their benefits. The tax subsidy, which has been around since WWII, increases employers’ offers of health insurance and encourages younger, healthier people to remain in employer-sponsored insurance. Though lawmakers have offered numerous proposals to move to a national market for nongroup insurance, any such policy would — by its very design — disrupt how millions of Americans are currently receiving their health care benefits.
Jindal takes this idea to an extreme. Not only would he kick people off their existing health care plans, but the plan could severely disadvantage lower-income Americans trying to buy coverage.
The “proposal” calls for eliminating the tax-exempt status of employer-sponsored plans — thus treating employer-sponsored benefits as taxable income — and replacing it with “a standard deduction for all forms of health insurance.”
“Over time, this policy might encourage more individuals to buy coverage independent of their employer plans,” the proposal concedes, before taking another swipe at the health care law. “Obamacare has completely disrupted the individual market, forcing many people who were satisfied with their coverage and the access they had to doctors and specialists being dumped into more costly and less comprehensive insurance simply because of Obamacare,” it says.
Estimates suggest that coverage loses under Jindal’s proposal would be far higher. Analysis conducted by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (CBPP) of a very similar proposal offered by the Republican Study Committee in 2013 found that replacing the tax exclusion with a deduction “would likely cause employer-based health coverage to seriously erode by encouraging employers to discontinue their coverage.” Though estimates remain scarce, Health Affairs concluded that Sen. John McCain’s (R-AZ) 2008 presidential campaign health care proposal — which would have similarly swapped the tax exclusion for a refundable tax credit — could have caused “twenty million Americans to lose such coverage.”
Sicker and lower-income people would be most disadvantaged by what Jindal is offering. With the Affordable Care Act’s insurance regulations fully repealed, individuals who lost their employer-sponsored insurance would turn to the individual market, where insurers would be able to cherry pick the healthiest enrollees or charge more for pre-existing conditions.
And though the proposal doesn’t specify the size of the proposed new deduction, the provision would primarily benefit people in higher tax brackets and be worth little (or nothing) to the vast majority of uninsured. Lower-income Americans would only see a modest benefit, while people who don’t owe taxes to begin with or have very low incomes will see almost no benefit at all. The vast majority of uninsured are in the 15 percent tax bracket or less and would reap few, if any, rewards from Jindal’s proposal.
The plan also cuts billions from Medicaid by block granting the program, allows insurers to circumvent state insurance regulations by allowing companies to sell plans nationwide and includes $100 billion over 10 years to encourage states to develop their own health care solutions (mostly by establishing or expanding high-risk insurance pools).

Obama Plan to Cap Health Insurance Overhead Flawed
by David Rosenfeld
As part of reining in health insurance costs, President Barack Obama and leading reform advocates in Congress want to limit the amount of money insurers spend on administrative expenses.
There’s just one problem: The formula Obama and others want to use to determine an appropriate level of administrative overhead allows health insurers to directly benefit as premiums rise — a very perverse incentive to lower costs. Put another way, as long as premiums increase at a rate higher than general inflation, Obama’s plan would allow health insurers to continue reaping greater profits while spending more on salaries, marketing and office buildings with each passing year.
The issue can be arcane, but it’s crucial to understanding a major health insurance industry justification for setting administrative costs: the “medical-loss ratio,” the percent of premium dollars insurers spend on medical expenses. According to regulators in Oregon and some in other parts of the country, this method is flawed and should be re-examined.
Oregon lawmakers this year passed what’s likely to become the country’s most progressive look at regulating health insurance premiums, and perhaps the U.S. Congress should take a look.
Oregon’s Law

 Starting next year, Oregon insurers will have to submit detailed reports on administrative costs, down to how much they spend on office furniture. More importantly, through rule-making still in progress, Teresa Miller, administrator of the Oregon Insurance Division, wants to prohibit administrative costs from exceeding increases for that year in the Consumer Price Index, which rose on average 2.8 percent annually over the past eight years.
Insurers opposed the effort when the bill came before lawmakers. Mike Becker, a lobbyist for Regence Blue Cross Blue Shield of Oregon, the state’s largest commercial insurer, testified at a legislative committee hearing earlier this year.
“This is not about health care reform,” Becker said. “This is about untested experiments. Nowhere in the country has this degree of rate regulation been applied.”
Now that the law has passed, insurers continue to resist state regulators through the rule-making process. “I’ve been disappointed that the insurance industry really seems to be digging in to fight transparency at any turn,” said state Rep. Chip Shields, D-North Portland, who leads the effort among state lawmakers on rate regulation. “I’m very concerned that the political pressure from the insurance companies will be immense.”
Currently, as in most states, administrative costs are allowed to increase at the same staggering rate as premiums, which have gone up more than 10 percent annually for the past decade not because there are more visits to the hospital, but because those visits have become on average more expensive.
The actual rate of medical inflation, meanwhile, remains a fuzzy number. Medical care inflation over the past decade rose on average more than 4 percent annually, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, but that figure is routinely rejected as well below the actual rate.
“Why would administrative costs stick to premiums? They shouldn’t,” Miller asked. “The cost-drivers just aren’t the same. It doesn’t make any sense to attach administrative expenses to the rest of the rate filing that’s going to go up at medical inflation rates.”
Miller knew she had a landmark piece of legislation on her hands, so she jumped at the opportunity to share it with her colleagues in other states. She took pages of the health care reform bill that dealt with administrative costs to a June conference of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners.
“I changed my airline ticket for the conference,” Miller said. “We’ve been talking about this for a couple of years now. I said, ‘Here’s the legislation we just passed.’ And they were very excited.”
Duplicating Elsewhere

 State laws in most cases prevent regulators from dissecting administrative costs in such a detailed fashion, said Steven Ostlund, an actuary with the Alabama Department of Insurance who chairs the task force where Miller presented the legislation.
“To my knowledge, Oregon is the first to address this as directly as they did,” Ostlund said.
The group of actuaries at the NAIC listened intently to Miller’s presentation and made copies of Oregon’s new law in hopes of inspiring similar action in their own states. Whether Congress will do the same appears unlikely based on the draft bills that passed out of committees so far.
In discussing health insurance at town hall meetings, Obama endorsed a concept in HR 3200 that dictates insurers spend no less than 85 percent of every premium dollar on medical expenses. That percentage represents an insurers’ medical-loss ratio. Insurers also keep target-loss ratios, which dictate spending and help plan for the following year’s rate adjustments.
Commercial insurers typically maintain loss ratios between 75 and 90 percent. Put another way, 75 to 90 cents of every premium dollar goes toward actual health care costs, mostly doctors, hospitals and prescription drugs. The remainder goes to insurer profits and administrative costs, such as salaries and marketing.
A high loss ratio suggests insurers are keeping administrative expenses at a reasonable rate — after all, they’re only retaining 15 cents out of each dollar spent on insurance premiums.
But while the percentage seems reasonable, the total amount insurers reap actually keeps pace with the skyrocketing costs families and individuals pay for health insurance premiums. It’s not uncommon in recent years for premiums to increase more than 20 percent, even more than 40 percent in the case of some individuals and small group plans.
Most of that astronomical increase comes from the exploding costs of existing services, hospital charges, new technologies and pharmaceuticals — not because it suddenly costs 20 or 40 percent more to administer higher bills.
Therefore, even if an insurers’ medical-loss ratio remains the same from one year to the next, if administrative costs increase in line with the Consumer Price Index, say 3 percent, and premiums increase by any percentage greater than that, insurers are making a lot more money.
“If in fact the reason your rates are going up is an increase in health care costs, and the administrative costs just continue to balloon along with it, the administrative costs at some point have become extraordinarily overpriced,” said Ellen Pinney, founder of Oregon Health Action Campaign, an advocacy group.
Unrelated Increase

 “Overpriced,” of course, is in the eye of the beholder.
Two good reasons administrative costs might rise include an increase in enrollment, if the health plan has to deal with more members, or an increase in utilization of services.
But neither appears to have happened in recent years.
Based on U.S. Census data, the number of Americans with private health insurance has increased less than 1 percent from 1999 to 2007.
Considering hospital services, the leading driver of health care costs, utilization increased about 1.2 percent annually, based on Kaiser Family Foundation statistics detailed at Statehealthfacts.org.
“Rising claim costs — not administrative expenses — drive premiums,” said Samantha Meese, spokeswoman for Regence Blue Cross Blue Shield of Oregon. Meese cited the company’s low administrative costs in relation to premiums (8.5 percent last year) to demonstrate its low overhead.
America’s Health Insurance Plans, a national industry trade group, did not respond to a request for comment on this article.
It’s not the number of cases that has increased, said Bernard Friedman, a health care economist with the federal Agency for Health Care Quality and Research. It’s the cost per case.
“In some [areas of medicine], the numbers of cases are increasing. In other areas, the number of cases are falling right now, but the cost per case could be increasing if, for instance, it’s only the severely ill who can’t benefit from the modern medication who still have to come to the hospital [for life-saving treatment].”
After hospitals, the two next biggest medical cost-drivers are pharmaceutical drugs and physician services. “Those are two big components that are missing in our data sets. Those are hard numbers to get,” said Herb Wong, a senior economist with AHRQ.
“Although folks use Medicare information, that’s probably not appropriate [for private insurers] because the populations are much different in terms of behavior,” Wong said. Medicare beneficiaries are older and tend to see doctors and take more prescription drugs than younger patients insured by commercial health plans.
A far better way to judge administrative costs might be to divide them per member per month, which a recent report commissioned by the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association does to compare commercial plans’ administrative costs to that of Medicare.
The report, conducted by the Sherlock Company, (see “Resources” at right to see the full report) uses a per member per month standard to argue that commercial insurers have lower overhead costs than Medicare, which generally maintains 3 to 6 percent administrative costs in relation to premiums. It argues that private plans spend on average $12.51 per member per month in the individual and small group markets compared to $13.19 the government spends under traditional Medicare.
So if it works for insurers in arguing their own case, why not apply the same logic to overall health insurance reform as well?
Sign up for our free e-newsletter.
Are you on Facebook? Become our fan.
Follow us on Twitter.
Add our news to your site.

Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder Forces Unemployed Workers Off Unemployment Insurance While Giving Corporations A Tax Cut
By Tanya Somanader

In the last few weeks of 2011, Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder (R) rounded out his concerted campaign against Michigan workers with a few final laws. In a prejudicial move against the LGBT community, Snyder signed a measure prohibiting all public employees from providing benefits for their unmarried partners. In considering his state’s 10.6 percent unemployment rate, Snyder also signed a law forcing some of Michigan’s over 400,000 unemployed workers to take low-wage jobs after 10 weeks of benefits, even if those jobs pay less than they were making before:
The measures require some unemployed workers to take new jobs after 10 weeks of benefits even if the available work is outside their previous experience or pays lower wages than they were making before. They also make it harder for someone to collect jobless benefits if they’re fired for cause or leave a job voluntarily.[…]
Snyder disagreed with critics who say requiring jobless workers to take a job paying 120 percent of their weekly benefit could trap them in a low-wage position by leaving them little time to look for work in their area of expertise.
“It’s to encourage people to work. It’s not to have them go backward,” Snyder said of the legislation. “It’s easiest to find a job when you’ve gotten a job.”
This new requirement comes in addition to Snyder’s decision to cut the availability of unemployment insurance from 26 weeks to 20 weeks starting in 2012. The measure also encapsulates Snyder’s priorities over his first year in office — placing the burden on the most vulnerable for the sake of the state’s bottom line. In 2011, he “shaved billions of dollars off future health care and retirement commitments,” proposed ending the state’s Earned Income Tax Credit, cut funding for school districts by eight to ten percent, cut aid for 11,000 low-income families and nearly 30,000 children, and enacted a regressive increase in personal taxes — all in the name of the deficit.
Naturally, not all Michiganders were asked to share in such sacrifices — namely, corporations. While more than 1.5 million of his constituents faced poverty, Snyder enacted a $1.7 billion tax cut for corporations, or about “$30 in corporate tax cuts for every dollar saved in welfare benefit cuts.” Indeed, Snyder pushed to cut the state’s business taxes by nearly $2 billion, or 86 percent.
In enacting such preferential treatment for those who need it least, Snyder did earn an impressive recognition in 2011. For his first year in office, Snyder ranked as one of the most unpopular governors in the country.

How I lost health insurance for the remainder of the year, then got it back because of responsive customer service
The need for government services (and private insurance companies) to communicate better digitally
UPDATE 3/16/2017: This post was written as a personal rant not intended actually to reach anyone, but the following day, I received a call from my insurance company, Ambetter, offering to help. They ultimately decided to reverse their previous stance and allow me to pay my balance and restore active insurance. So, kudos to their customer service, and kudos to the power of digital activism. @jeffjarvis taught me all I know.
For Obamacare to work at its best, we need each and every one of low-risk millennials like myself who aren’t covered by an employer’s health-insurance plan to sign up for coverage — to balance out the risks and distribute the costs.
When I lived in New York State and was insured by Oscar, getting and keeping insurance was a seamless process, as I could always check the status of my insurance plan via Oscar’s mobile app, and received SMS alerts of all activity. That is how I, as a digital native, communicate.
I applied for 2017 coverage in the State of Georgia the very first day I could, Nov. 1, 2016. I paid my first month’s balance for coverage for January. I did everything on time and in accordance with the ACA provisions. Or at least I thought.
In late January, I had to move from my apartment because of mold caused by flooding damage from Hurricane Matthew. It wasn’t until last week (March 7) that I set up mail forwarding with USPS. Two days later, I receive a giant stack of letters, mostly advertisements, but four of them were from my insurance company.
Apparently, even though I thought my insurance company had retained my payment on file after paying the first month’s balance as almost every other modern company does now, Ambetter did not. Despite the fact that Ambetter had my email address and mobile number on file, the only method used to reach me to notify me of the fact that money was past due was USPS mail. Of course, because I moved and had yet to update my address, I didn’t receive those notices until three days ago.
Just six days after the date the payment was missed, Ambetter voided my insurance coverage for the remainder of the year, and has refused to reinstate it. I offered on multiple calls to pay the full outstanding balance and pay ahead even. The answer I received was consistently a no. Not only does this mean I can’t be insured by Ambetter. It means I can’t be insured at all. For the rest of the year.
I’m not allowed to pay the outstanding balance. I don’t qualify for special coverage (my move was not to a different state). All because Ambetter and the state marketplace still see communication through the lens of a generation ago: bills sent via snail-mail. It’s time for these companies that have such outsized influence in people’s lives to start communicating at the same level their customers do.

Florida Needs Flood Insurance Market Parity and Modernization Act
By Dennis Ross (FL-15) and Patrick E. Murphy (FL-18)
Our‭ ‬state of Florida is no stranger to catastrophic storms and devastating hurricanes.‭ ‬With‭ ‬98‭ ‬percent of Florida communities participating in the federal National Flood Insurance Program‭ (‬NFIP‭)‬,‭ ‬homeowners and business owners know firsthand the importance of purchasing flood insurance to protect their families and businesses from disaster.
In‭ ‬2014‭ ‬alone,‭ ‬and to no surprise,‭ ‬Florida surpassed all other states in total number of insurance claims and total claim payments for flooding.‭ ‬Furthermore,‭ ‬out of the top‭ ‬10‭ ‬claiming states,‭ ‬Florida‭’‬s total number of claims was more than three times higher‭ ‬than‭ ‬the average,‭ ‬and its total claim payments were more than four times the average.
However,‭ ‬we are‭ ‬not alone‭ ‬in our risk exposure to floods.‭ ‬Every property faces some type of flood risk.‭ ‬In fact,‭ ‬in the past five years,‭ ‬all‭ ‬50‭ ‬states have experienced floods or flash‭ ‬floods.‭ ‬To insure against these serious risks,‭ ‬property owners have‭ ‬one choice:‭ ‬the‭ ‬NFIP.‭ ‬While‭ ‬the‭ ‬NFIP has served a critical role,‭ ‬providing an option in a market that was without one,‭ ‬recent reforms have left Floridians looking for other options.‭ ‬Choice and competition in a robust and appropriately regulated marketplace will drive down costs and better meet the needs of consumers.
This is not a partisan issue.‭ ‬It is a practical matter.‭
Because federal flood insurance is the main game in town when it comes to determining rates and providing insurance,‭ ‬consumers are left with‭ ‬very‭ ‬few options to insure against flood losses to their homes or businesses.‭ ‬For‭ ‬instance,‭ ‬an NFIP policy only covers up to‭ ‬$250,000‭ ‬of damages related to a residential home.‭ ‬Also,‭ ‬NFIP policies do not cover homeowners‭’‬ living expenses,‭ ‬such as temporary housing,‭ ‬if they are displaced by a flood.‭ ‬In the case of a business,‭ ‬NFIP policies do not provide coverage for‭ ‬financial losses suffered as a result of a flood.‭
While the NFIP is limited in what its policies can cover,‭ ‬the private sector is not.‭
The private sector is also in a better position to provide stronger incentives for property owners to invest in mitigation and resiliency.‭ ‬Ultimately,‭ ‬this increased emphasis on mitigation will benefit homeowners,‭ ‬business owners and taxpayers alike.‭
Floridians and all Americans across the country would greatly benefit from more choices when it comes to flood insurance policies.‭ ‬Private competition in this market will lead to greater innovation and more affordable and comprehensive policies for consumers.‭
Expanding options and driving down‭ ‬costs of flood insurance for homeowners and business owners have been some of our top priorities since we were elected to represent the Sunshine State in our nation‭’‬s capital.‭
When we learned that‭ ‬unnecessary regulations were preventing the development of a private flood insurance‭ ‬marketplace,‭ ‬we teamed‭ ‬across the aisle to solve this problem,‭ ‬introducing‭ ‬H.R.‭ ‬2901,‭ ‬the‭ ‬Flood Insurance Market Parity‭ ‬and Modernization Act.‭ ‬This bipartisan legislation will remove the barriers that are hindering consumers‭’‬ flood insurance options.
This‭ ‬legislation is a win-win for Florida families,‭ ‬giving them more options for flood insurance coverage and using new competition to drive down the prices of plans.‭ ‬Also,‭ ‬it‭ ‬preserves‭ ‬protections for property owners who choose to‭ ‬leave the‭ ‬NFIP‭ ‬for the private market and wish to return.‭
For example,‭ ‬under the current rules,‭ ‬if a policyholder were to leave the federal program for any reason,‭ ‬including leaving to try the private market,‭ ‬that policyholder would lose any subsidy status‭ ‬they previously held with the NFIP should the policyholder choose to ever return to the NFIP.‭ ‬The policyholder must maintain‭ “‬continuous coverage‭”‬ with the NFIP in order to maintain grandfather status.‭ ‬Our bipartisan legislation would change these rules to allow private flood insurance policies approved by a state regulator to count as‭ “‬continuous coverage‭”‬ by the NFIP.
Ultimately,‭ ‬the consumer‭ ‬benefits from increased competition and options in this market and,‭ ‬with Florida property owners in mind,‭ ‬we have been proud to work together in a bipartisan manner to move this important legislation through the House Financial Services Committee with an overwhelming vote of‭ ‬53–0.‭
Moving forward,‭ ‬we will continue to press‭ ‬for this legislation to be enacted into law so‭ ‬Floridians and all Americans‭ ‬are empowered with more choices and affordability in the flood insurance market.‭
Watch the committee proceedings here:
Ross-Murphy Flood Insurance Market Parity and Modernization Act Unanimously Passes House Financial Services Committee

Michigan Lawmakers Considering Abortion Bill That Would Force Women To Buy ‘Rape Insurance’
CREDIT: AP PHOTO/AL GOLDIS
Michigan lawmakers are currently deciding whether to advance a bill that would require women in the state to purchase a separate insurance policy for abortion coverage, even in cases of rape or incest. If it’s approved, Michigan would join a long list of other states that have attacked abortion access by preventing women from using their own insurance to pay for it.
The debate over the legislation has heated up this week, particularly since the measure would deny abortion coverage even to women who have become pregnant as a result of rape. Although the overwhelming majority of Americans believe that rape victims should have access to legal abortion services, lawmakers continue to propose policies that would have callous implications for individuals who have been sexually assaulted.
Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder (R) vetoed the proposed insurance ban last year for exactly this reason — pointing out that it would require rape victims to pay for the total cost of their abortion procedure out-of-pocket, unless they had thought ahead and purchased a separate insurance rider for abortion services. “I don’t believe it is appropriate to tell a woman who becomes pregnant due to a rape that she needed to select elective insurance coverage,” Snyder noted when he rejected the bill last December.
But Michigan’s anti-choice community disagrees. Earlier this year, when advocating for the proposed legislation, a prominent anti-choice leader in Michigan suggested that rape is like a car accident and it’s appropriate to require women to buy “extra insurance” to prepare for it. After Snyder’s veto, abortion opponents decided to simply circumvent the governor and collect enough signatures to provoke a “citizen-initiated” vote on the measure. That petition was successful, and the measure headed to the legislature on Tuesday.
Lawmakers now have 40 days — not including the upcoming holiday break — to act on the measure. If they don’t take any action, the issue will be placed on the 2014 ballot for a statewide vote. If the legislature approves it, on the other hand, the bill will immediately become law — even without Snyder’s signature.
Leading Democrats in the legislature are blasting the proposed measure. “Forcing women to decide whether they want to buy ‘rape insurance’ and even compelling parents to make the unfathomable decision about whether to buy it for their daughters is truly despicable,” State Senate Minority Leader Gretchen Whitmer (D) said in a press release on Monday. “Requiring Michigan women to plan ahead for an unplanned pregnancy is not only illogical, it’s one of the most misogynistic proposals I have ever seen in the Michigan Legislature.”
But abortion opponents aren’t giving up. Save the 1, a national anti-choice group that advocates for abortion restrictions without exceptions, organized a press conference at the Michigan Capitol on Tuesday to make the point that rape victims shouldn’t ever have the option of choosing abortion. A group of adults who were conceived as a result of rape argued that “no child deserves to be punished for the crimes of their father.”
The issue of rape and abortion access has become particularly contentious over the past year, after several Republican lawmakers have made controversial comments on the subject. Last August, former Rep. Todd Akin (R-MO) asserted that pregnancies resulting from rape are very rare because the female body “has ways to try to shut that whole thing down.” And since then, other GOP politicians have suggested that pregnancies from rape are a “gift from God,” mocked rape exceptions as “little gotcha amendments,” and suggested abortion access for rape victims is unnecessary because ending a pregnancy will “put more violence on a woman’s body.”

@jose_garde: “IoT — #Insurance of Things? — Leo Tech Services Pte. Ltd. — #CustomerExperience #IoT”
5 billion devices already connected, up to 20 billion by 2020 what is IoT’s impact on insurance for consumers and the companies developing InsurTech? read more

Farewell, Terrible Health Insurance

I got a letter in the mail from Blue Cross Blue Shield over the weekend that my $184/mo. calamity health insurance (EmpireBlue Hospital Plus, to be exact) will no longer be offered in the new year.
I was initially disappointed to lose my sad compromise between paying $761/mo. for COBRA and going without the way I did when I was 22 (and 23, and 24), but I am taking its new prohibition under the Affordable Care Act as a sign that it is probably a complete rip-off. Mother Jones’ “The Real Story Behind the Phony Canceled Health Insurance Scandal” confirms my suspicions:
The ACA was designed specifically to prevent insurance companies from peddling lousy insurance plans and to force these firms to replace these subpar products with affordable plans providing better and effective coverage. The plans being canceled are ending because they offered insufficient coverage — and only a few years ago both Rs and Ds were upset about these kinds of plans. But there’s been collective amnesia about the shoddy plans that GOPers have happily exploited in recent days. Perhaps Obama should have said, “Those of you who obtain insurance on the individual market can keep your plans unless it’s the sort of rip-off plan the ACA will forbid. Otherwise, you will be offered new options that actually give you decent coverage at a decent price.”
I never did use my calamity insurance — mostly because you can only use it if you get hit by a car or your appendix bursts or something else “life-threatening” happens that sends you to the hospital — and god-willing, I won’t in the next two months either. That means I’ll have paid a total of $1,472 this year for what amounts to a very relative peace of mind (I say relative because sure, my ER visit would be covered, but I fear for anyone with this insurance who needs long-term care). Maybe it’s worth it, but regular old health insurance, even at double the cost, sure will be nice.
Photo: leoncillo sabillo

How Obamacare Critics Are Scaring The Poor Out Of Signing Up For Health Insurance
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
By Igor Volsky
Critics of the Affordable Care Act are seizing on a decades-old provision in Medicaid law to scare lower-income Americans from signing up for health care insurance, warning newly eligible enrollees that the federal government could take their house and other assets once they die.
“I was leaning toward not getting Medicaid, because there is somewhat of a stigma,” Steve Olin, 60, told the Washington Post. “Then, when I heard about the estate recovery, I was really sure.” The paper describes this “little-known aspect of Medicaid” as “the latest anxiety to spring from the health-care law” that is “causing fear.”
But the provision has little to do with reform. In 1965, the federal government permitted states to “recover from the estates of deceased Medicaid recipients who were over age 65 when they received benefits.” The provision was grounded in the rather conservative theory that wealthier individuals should take responsibility for their health care costs and pay back taxpayers for hundreds of thousands of dollars of care. As Washington & Lee law professor Tim Jost put it, “it’s only fair that the state can recover for long-term care if there are significant assets left behind.”
Congress agreed and in 1993, went a step further, requiring states to implement a Medicaid estate recovery program for “deceased recipients who were 55 or older” in cases of nursing home or other long-term institutional services. It also gave states the flexibility to recover assets for other health care services covered by Medicaid. When health care reform passed in 2010, it did nothing to change the law.
Fast forward to 2013. Millions of individuals with incomes below 133 percent of the federal poverty line are applying for Medicaid under the expansion provided in the Affordable Care Act and are now theoretically subject to the recovery measure. “State can seize your assets to pay for care after you’re forced into Medicaid by Obamacare,” HotAir.com warned. Another conservative blog, RedState.com, termed the provision, a “Medicaid asset-seizure bonanza.”
But it’s unlikely that the provision will become “a cash cow for states to milk the poor and the middle class,” as one Washington Times article put it.
First, recovery programs vary tremendously across the country. According to a 2005 AARP report, 25 states recover all services covered under Medicaid, 10 recover items besides long-term care and 10 only recover for long-term services. Newly eligible individuals who live in one of the states with an expansive recovery programs would have to be 55 or older, maintain significant none income earning assets (yet still qualify for Medicaid) and remain ineligible for the provision’s existing exemptions. States are prohibited from recovering assets during the lifetime of the surviving spouse, from a surviving child who is under age 21, or if the deceased sibling or adult child lived in the home continuously for a significant period of time.
That rules out a good portion of the newly-eligible population, Jost says, calling the issue “more an imagined than a real problem.” Still, he concedes that in some instances, seniors with expensive assets could be affected. Some states are adopting new rules asserting that “recovery now applies only to long-term care,” as required by federal law, and the Obama administration is preparing to issue additional clarification.
“You could conceivably have someone a million dollar home that yields no income but is very valuable who applies for Medicaid, and runs up big bills and then dies, and they come after their estate,” Jost said, but pointed out “it’s going to have to be a fairly significant asset to be worth [the state’s] trouble.”
“This is not a very big problem,” he concluded.
Update:
The Huffington Post’s Sam Stein points out that ALEC has backed Medicaid asset recovery since 1995.

The Economic Case For Gun Liability Insurance
By Annie-Rose Strasser

One proposal bouncing around the US House of Representatives to help curb gun violence is The Firearm Risk Protection Act, a law that would require gun owners to purchase liability insurance for their weapon, or pay a penalty. The federal legislation, put forth by Rep. Carolyn Maloney (D-NY) with seven co-sponsors, is obviously controversial; gun owners are reluctant to take on the additional cost burden, and see it as an impingement on their Second Amendment rights. Lawmakers have considered similar efforts in California, Massachusetts, Maryland, and Connecticut, and all have elicited controversy or been withdrawn.
But whether or not it sits well with the American people, gun liability insurance has its economic merits. University of Michigan economics and public policy professor Justin Wolfers recently made the case for gun insurance. As he sees it, people don’t count unintentional crime committed by their firearm into their calculations when considering purchasing a firearm. “When people fail to consider the broader social costs of choices like buying a gun,” Wolfers explained, “they’re more likely to do them, and society suffers”:
Another even more powerful approach is to recognize that the problem isn’t guns per se, but gun violence. Thus, instead of taxing guns, we should tax gun violence. Basically, this is the same as saying that we should make gun owners liable for any damage their guns do. Not only would this discourage some people from buying guns, it would lead those who do keep guns to be more careful with how they’re stored. Indeed, greater care would surely have kept Adam Lanza out of his mother’s cache. The problem, though, is that Nancy Lanza is neither with us to pay the damages her gun caused, nor could she afford to pay for the enormous damage her gun wrought in Newtown. And so the only way this solution works is if guns required mandatory liability insurance, much as we force car owners to buy insurance for the damage their machines wreak.
It’s the sort of careful solution that would enable people who enjoy hunting to continue with their passions, but also push them to take the sorts of precautions that we all wish the Lanza household had taken. If the gun lobby were smart, and if they really are interested in being socially responsible while keeping their weapons, they would be pushing hard for this sort of policy.
NPR has a round-up of other economists who have weighed in, including Cornell economics professor Robert Frank compared it to car insurance, pointing out that, “Nothing in the Constitution grants people the right to expose others to serious risk without compensation.”
McCarthy’s proposal would impose a $10,000 fine on anyone who refused to get insurance.
An insurance program for firearms would help shift the cost of gun violence onto gun owners and away from all other taxpayers and victims. Right now, taxpayers — be it those who responsibly own gun, those who recklessly do, or those who have never even touched a firearm — take on the financial burden of guns: violent crimes are estimated to cost taxpayers $3.7 billion every year. A part of the reason for that is because low-income people, who often lack even basic health insurance, are the ones being killed by guns. Even the more affluent can suffocate under the piling debt of hospital bills, opting for bankruptcy. And when victims of gun violence die, their families must then scrape up the cash to pay for a funeral, compensate for the lost income, and continue on with their lives.

#Out2Enroll Campaign Will Help LGBT People Obtain Health Insurance Coverage

By Andrew Cray and Kellan Baker
Like many people across the country, LGBT Americans have long struggled to get the health care they need, when they need it. Adequate health care can literally mean the difference between life and death. Yet too often, barriers like lack of insurance stand in between the LGBT community and good health.
Research commissioned by the Center for American Progress reveals that one in three LGBT Americans are uninsured. Many hardworking LGBT people have medical bills piling up or have put off care because it was too expensive. Health coverage is indisputably an LGBT equality issue.
But there is hope for LGBT people who have been struggling to get the care they need. New, affordable coverage options will be available under the Affordable Care Act, and LGBT Americans and their families will be able to shop for insurance plans starting on October 1 of this year.
To help inform the LGBT community about these new coverage options, the Center for American Progress, the Sellers Dorsey Foundation, and the Federal Agencies Project will announce the launch of a new campaign Thursday, called Out2Enroll. The centerpiece of this initiative is a website tailored to the LGBT community, which includes information about key issues such as coverage for same-sex partners, transgender-inclusive benefits, and anti-discrimination protections introduced by the health reform law.
Out2Enroll will also work with partners from across the country to spread the word about open enrollment, and about insurance coverage options that can open the door to better health. Teaming up with partners such as Enroll America, Community Catalyst, LGBT equality organizations, and consumer health advocates across the country, the unprecedented campaign aims to encourage enrollment through Health Insurance Marketplaces and offer community-specific information to connect LGBT Americans with coverage and navigate these new options.
The Out2Enroll campaign kicks off today with a briefing at the White House, featuring remarks from Senior Advisor to the President Valerie Jarrett, Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius, and LGBT health and health reform experts from across the country.
To watch a live stream of the launch event starting at 1:15 pm EST, to get more information about what health reform is doing for the LGBT community, and to come #Out2Enroll, visit www.out2enroll.org.

The Insurance Boom in Fintech
I continue to be bullish and fasciated with all things do-it yourself in capital markets and the rest of financial services. I believe the Robinhood new user and transaction growth is setting off a transformational era.
A first time stock buyer of Snapchat can buy 1 shares at $23 and change their mind the next day and sell it for $22.90 — losing 10 cents not $16.10 at an online brokerage. In a $200 account you can see how the cost of learning is dropping at an astronomical rate.
Combined with the fact that financial experts are contributing endlessly on social media streams…you will have a massive increase in financial literacy.
The transformation in fintech won’t just take place in capital markets.
The hot topic of the last year in fintech is insurance technology.
I google searched it for you to do some reading of your own.
I have met with a lot of insurance companies over the last few years and their innovation departments to hear about the industry and the opportunities to disrupt and partner.
Some context for how big these Companies are…Geico spends approximately $1 billion a year (5 percent of auto premium sales) and $450 plus to acquire a customer. Insurance companies that use sales agents pay nearly $1,000 per customer. That strategy wont work for millennials or Generation Y, so it’s easy to see why the insurance tech space is hot right now.
I imagine Google and Facebook will have a huge piece of all insurance business 30 years out.
Originally published at Howard Lindzon.

In November 2015, we calculated that at least 25 million Americans have secured health insurance one way or another thanks to the Affordable Care Act. Source: http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2015/nov/11/carly-fiorina/carly-fiorina-says-obamacare-isnt-helping-anyone/

Without Medicaid Expansion, Over 40 Percent Of The Poorest Americans Won’t Get Any Health Insurance
CREDIT: AP IMAGES
By Sy Mukherjee
In the states refusing to accept Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion, approximately 42 percent of the Americans living below the Federal Poverty Line (FPL) — i.e., people making less than $11,170 per year — won’t be able to take advantage of any of the health law’s new coverage options for the poor, according to a new study by the Commonwealth Fund.
The health law originally had two avenues to ensure that poor Americans can afford health coverage. It required every state to expand Medicaid coverage to all Americans making up to 133 percent FPL, or slightly under $15,000 per year for an individual. And it offered government subsidies to people making up to 399 percent FPL to help them buy insurance in Obamacare’s statewide insurance marketplaces. The law didn’t extend any government subsidies to the poorest Americans living below the poverty level, reasoning that these people would be eligible for an expanded Medicaid pool and therefore wouldn’t need them.
But the Supreme Court ruled the Medicaid expansion optional last summer, leaving it up to the states to decide whether or not to participate in it. That means if poor Americans live in states that refuse to expand Medicaid, they won’t be able to take advantage of the expanded public program or receive subsidies to buy insurance on the Obamacare marketplace.
Most GOP-led states home to lawmakers hostile to health reform have refused to go along with the optional expansion, despite the fact that the federal government will pay for the vast majority of it. Numerous studies have shown that states that don’t expand Medicaid are losing out on billions of dollars in federal funding and denying health benefits to about two-thirds of the poor Americans who were originally expected to gain Medicaid coverage under the law. Nonetheless, 21 states have explicitly refused to expand their programs while five still remain undecided:
The expansion map highlights the reality that many of the states forgoing Medicaid expansion have some of the highest rates of uninsurance and poverty in the country. Texas, Louisiana, Florida, South Carolina, Mississippi, and Georgia are all among the top ten most uninsured states in America. In addition, Oklahoma, Wyoming, Idaho, North Carolina, and Alaska have uninsurance rates higher than the U.S. national average of 21 percent. About one in five Americans residing in these states are living in poverty.
While the Commonwealth study authors note that some states are likely to eventually give in and accept the Medicaid expansion, they suggest congressional action to assist those who fall into the unintended coverage gap in the meantime. “Congress could step in and provide a solution by passing legislation that would amend the law to make all adults with incomes below 100 percent of poverty, who are not eligible for Medicaid, eligible for subsidized private plans offered through the marketplaces. This would ensure that all Americans have access to the law’s sweeping new reforms when they take effect in January,” the researchers wrote.

Georgia’s Governor Took Money From The Insurance Lobby While Denying Health Coverage To The Poor
Gov. Nathan Deal (R-GA) in a 2012 state meeting with reporters CREDIT: AP PHOTO/DAVID TULIS
By Sy Mukherjee
Georgia governor and fervent Obamacare critic Nathan Deal (R) has taken over $550,000 from health care lobby interests and groups opposed to the Affordable Care Act through a Super PAC whose financial activities were kept secret until this past Labor Day weekend, according to the advocacy group Better Georgia.
The money was comprised of donations from large insurance companies opposed to consumer protections in the health law — such as not being able to deny Americans with pre-existing conditions from buying coverage — including $50,000 contributions from United Health Care, Inc. and WellCare of Georgia and lesser funds from insurers Humana, Blue Cross, and Aetna.
The Super PAC — called Real PAC — had not disclosed its finances for the past two years until an independent investigative reporter uncovered several corporate donors earlier this summer. That prompted Deal to release the numbers over the long weekend — a move that critics say is intended to minimize media coverage of the donations.
Advocates argue that the health care industry’s political contributions to Deal are striking when juxtaposed against his refusal to accept generous federal funding to take expand Medicaid under Obamacare. Taking part in the Medicaid expansion would have cut Georgia’s uninsurance rate by more than 51 percent and extended basic coverage to 650,000 low-income Georgians.
“It’s clear from the governor’s actions while he’s been taking this money that he’s been working for [insurance companies’] interests,” said Better Georgia Executive Director Bryan Long in an interview with ThinkProgress. “Those 650,000 people in Georgia are among the poorest in Georgia, and they didn’t have the million dollars to put into this PAC. So I think it’s very clear that money talks.”
Many GOP governors have dug in their heels against Obamacare to the detriment of the poorest people in their states. But as Raw Story points out, Deal’s administration has been brazen about its intention to undermine health reform.
Insurance Commissioner Ralph Hudgens (R) went so far as to tell an audience of Republicans that his office’s number one goal regarding the health law is to do “everything in our power to be an obstructionist.” Hudgens also detailed some ways the Deal administration would go about doing that, such as imposing harsher requirements for people trying to become Obamacare “navigators,” who will help consumers buy coverage on Obamacare’s insurance marketplace beginning in October.

Not all health insurance plans cover the cost of psychiatry or psychology without
Paying a high deductible first or
Paying a high coinsurance fee or
Guaranteeing that any provider is in network for a health insurance plan that costs $400 (next year, closer to $600) for a private, individual plan
This is even assuming that you have health insurance.
I stand by my argument that access to affordable and decent mental health care is very much out of reach for many millennials.

enterprise applications, as well as utility applications like insurance or banking, or managing a CRM may not make as much sense with this type of design. The key for something being usefully designed this way is when collaboration and communication are at the center of the product. That said — think how much we learn by borrowing someone else’s Excel template and building a new model from that as just one workplace example. There might be lots of ways to leverage this paradigm within the workplace even if it isn’t just taking an interface and showing the next person how something works.

Would be interested to know more about why insurance was the backbone for a lot of Berkshire Hathaway’s growth. I know some basic details, but would be interested in hearing what others have to say. Anyone?

Dunlop clinches Superbike pole as Anstey leads Supersport machines at the MCE Insurance Ulster Grand Prix

Home favourite Michael Dunlop laid down the fastest time of the week to secure pole position for Saturday’s Superbike race at the MCE Insurance Ulster Grand Prix.
The Ballymoney rider’s 131.783 mph lap was enough to clinch the top spot ahead of Peter Hickman’s Kawasaki, while in the final session of the day Dunlop also took a win in the shortened Dundrod 150 Superbike race ahead of Bruce Anstey on the RCV Honda.
Conditions were once again mixed, ensuring the lap record remained safe for another day, with the Clerk of the Course Noel Johnston shuffling the schedule to allow time for as many practice sessions and races as possible.
Among those was final qualifying for Saturday’s Supersport races, where it was Bruce Anstey who took pole position ahead of Ian Hutchinson, Conor Cummins and Dean Harrison.
The ‘flying Kiwi’ was on fine form, but there were a number of strong performances throughout the chasing pack including Paul Jordan in ninth and Derek McGee in eleventh.
In the Plant Lubrication NI Dundrod 150 races, the Lightweight class saw one of the closest battles of the day with Neil Kernohan crossing the line just 0.069 ahead of Saintfield’s Davy Morgan, followed by Paul Robinson in third.
Things weren’t so close in the Ultra-lightweight race however, where Christian Elkin took a dominant win over Sam Wilson and Derek McGee on the Joey’s Bar Hondas. Newcomer Gary Dunlop came home in fourth, ahead of Melissa Kennedy and Callum Laidlaw.
Next up was the Dundrod 150 Challenge race and it was David Jackson who finished just ahead of Dominic Herbertson and Mike Booth, with Sam West a respectable fourth on his Dundrod debut.
In the Dundrod 150 National race meanwhile, Graham Kennedy took the win. Glenn Walker, Sean Connolly, Gavin Lupton and Dean Campbell rounded out the top five in a huge field of over 60 bikes.
Friday now sees a break in the action on track, with a family fun day scheduled in the paddock at Dundrod, before the MCE Insurance Ulster Grand Prix gets into gear on Saturday. Roads close at 9am sharp, with tickets available at road ends priced at £25 for adults and free for under 18s. The racing will also be broadcast live on BBC Radio Ulster.
The MCE Insurance Ulster Grand Prix and Plant Lubrication (NI) Dundrod 150 road races run between 8th — 13th. August. Tickets can be purchased during Bike Week at Topaz Airport Road Service Station and Whitemountain Centra Service Station or on the approach roads to the circuit on practice and race days. For full details visit ulstergrandprix.net.

Department of Insurance and Financial Services
The Department of Insurance and Financial Services regulates the insurance and financial services industries in order to protect consumers, strengthen the state’s business climate, and position these industries for economic growth. The governor’s proposed budget for fiscal years 2016 and 2017 recommends total funding of $65.1 million ($150,000 general fund).

Highlights of Governor’s Budget Recommendation
• The governor recommends funding of $36.5 million for financial institutions and insurance evaluation, $14.3 million for enforcement and consumer protection, $8.9 million for department services and information technology, and $5.4 million for insurance and consumer finance licensing.
• Funding of $150,000 general fund is recommended to study and analyze the impact of the Healthy Michigan Plan on private market insurance rates.


Channeling Bush, Obama Extends Deadline For Health Insurance Enrollment
CREDIT: AP
By Igor Volsky
The Obama administration will announce on Wednesday that individuals who had experienced difficulty signing up for the Affordable Care Act will still be able to enroll in insurance after the March 31st deadline and obtain coverage until mid-April. The move, the latest in a series of administration efforts to simply the enrollment process following a rocky rollout, echoes the Bush administration’s 2006 decision to help seniors enlist in Medicare Part D after the official enrollment deadline.
In May of 2006, just days before the end of open enrollment, President Bush took administrative action towaive “penalty fees for very low-income seniors and people with disabilities who sign up late” and allowed “the same impoverished beneficiaries to sign up for Medicare drug coverage until Dec. 31.”
“In other words, you can apply after May 15th without penalty,” Bush told seniors during an event in Florida. “And that’s important for low-income seniors to understand.”
Like Obamacare, the launch of President George W. Bush’s prescription benefit plan was hampered by technical glitches, setbacks, and mass confusion. As the May 15 deadline for enrollment loomed, a bipartisan group of lawmakers advocacy organizations, and a surprising number of newspaper editorials, urged the administration to extend the enrollment period and protect seniors from the penalties associated with late enrollment.
“In the months leading up to the initiation of the Medicare Part D program, beneficiaries were inundated with information about coverage options, which often caused confusion and frustration among seniors,” former Rep. Jason Altmire (D-PA), who introduced legislation to extend the deadline, said. “It is only fair to provide beneficiaries with the time necessary to properly choose an appropriate plan.” The bill attracted bipartisan support and companion legislation was introduced in the Senate.

The Health Insurance Industry’s ‘Duplicitous’ Campaign To Kill Health Reform

ThinkProgress spoke with Wendell Potter, a former VP of communications at health insurance giant CIGNA, about exactly how insurance companies derail reform and preserve the status quo. Working in public relations for CIGNA, Potter had a direct role in multiple campaigns in the past to minimize public outrage at insurance company abuses, defeat legislation aimed at regulating insurers, and the massive effort to discredit Michael Moore and his movie SiCKO. In addition to enormous amounts of money spent in direct lobbying and campaign contributions, Potter spelled out precisely how insurance companies have prepared to defeat meaningful reform.

Planned well before this year, insurance company CEOs, like Potter’s former boss at CIGNA H. Edward Hadway, formed a group called the Strategic Communications Committee to develop effective messages and strategy for the industry. Organized through AHIP, the lobbying front for insurance companies, the committee would work with large public relations companies to devise a two-pronged, “duplicitous campaign.” Because insurance companies suffer from low public approval, Potter said, the industry would present itself as “for reform” to the public, yet at the same time label proponents of meaningful reform as “extreme.” The public campaign is for the most part positive, and largely delivered by industry representatives like AHIP chief lobbyist Karen Ignagni. Potter noted:
It’s really a duplicitous PR campaign. They will talk about, in broad terms, how supportive they are of health care reform, but they will be working behind the scenes to kill very, very crucial parts of reform legislation like the public option.
Potter then explained how insurers would use a variety of front groups, set up by PR companies like APCO, to advance a hidden attack campaign. The “dirty” campaign involved feeding talking points to right-wing media, like Rush Limbaugh and Fox News. It also includes the creation of front groups to run negative advertisements about reform and mobilize anti-reform “grassroots” groups. Finally, insurers would coordinate with, and sometimes fund, conservative think-tanks to produce academic-appearing reports to advance their cause. Leaked memos from the insurance companies — regarding the campaign against Moore’s SiCKO movie — not only support Potter’s assertions, but specifically describe every step of this process.
The Charm Campaign:
Media — Working to charm the public, industry pays for ads to kill the public option, while sending CEOs on TV to argue for limited reform. AHIP, the lobbying trade group for the health insurance companies, is spending millions on television ads. Indeed, health insurance executives like Ron Williams are constantly on television making misleading claims about their efforts at reform.
Congress — Working to charm the public, industry lobbyists make false promises to the public and Congress. AHIP chief lobbyist Karen Ignagni regularly appears on television to make promises for reform. However, individual health insurance CEOs have categorically rejected the notion that they will abide by Ignagni’s overtures.
Think Tanks — Working to charm the public, industry-financed think-tanks churn out reports misleading the public about legislation. The Lewin Group, owned by insurer UnitedHealth, has been cited by anti-health reform advertisements and Republican lawmakers like Sen. Chuck Grassley (R-IA) in an effort to kill the public option. The Galen Institute, funded by other healthcare industry corporations, also provides fodder for anti-reform arguments.
Groups — Working to charm the public, industry coerces employees and customers to attend town halls with talking points to limit and derail reform. The insurance industry has hired the same astroturf lobbying firms used by tobacco companies to push employees to attend town halls. In addition, companies like WellPoint have sent false talking points to their customers, while urging them to lobby Congress. Humana recently sent a fear-mongering mailer to senior citizens, which directs them to sign up for the insurer campaign website run by the tobacco lobbying firm.
The Dirty Campaign:
Media — Working to kill all reform behind the scenes, industry provides talking points and scare tactics to a variety of right-wing media. As Potter explains, insurance companies routinely employ PR firms like APCO to distribute talking points to outlets such as Fox News, Rush Limbaugh, and The Washington Times.
Congress — Working to kill all reform behind the scenes, industry works with partisan lawmakers to obstruct, water-down, and kill reform bills. According to a new report, fourteen major health insurers and their industry association “flexed their political muscle to the tune of $2.5 million per month” to lobby on health reform this year. Health insurance companies have forged close ties to lawmakers. For example, Sen. Mike Enzi’s (R-WY) top health adviser is now a lobbyist for WellPoint. Indeed, Enzi has admitted his role is largely dedicated to obstructing reform.
Think Tanks — Working to kill all reform behind the scenes, industry coordinates with ideological allies on the right to produce reports meant to kill reform. The Pacific Research Institute, set up originally to support the tobacco industry’s dubious claims about its products, has pushed multiple lies about health reform. The leaked 2007 memos from the health insurance industry show how think tanks like the American Enterprise Institute, Heritage, and Cato were used to push an anti-health reform agenda. Similarly, AEI, Heritage, and Cato have promoted distortions about current reform legislation.
Front Groups — Working to kill all reform behind the scenes, industry funnels money through PR firms to various front groups which in turn run ads, storm town halls, organize anti-reform rallies. UnitedHealth was recently caught sending their employees to radical tea party protests. Front groups for major corporations, like Americans for Prosperity, have mobilized a variety of “grassroots” events to attack reform and spread fear about health care proposals. AFP played a central role in the insurance industry-led effort to discredit Michael Moore in 2007. Similarly, new front groups like Conservatives for Patients’ Rights and Coalition to Protect Patients’ Rights, a front group purporting to represent doctors, have sprung up to oppose health reform. As ThinkProgress has noted, CPPR is run by the infamous DC lobbying firm DCI Group, a firm that has set up multiple front groups in the past.
Research and interview of Wendell Potter conducted by Lee Fang, video produced by Victor Zapanta, and graphics by Evan Hensleigh

The Ideal Insurance Client
Arguably an insurance client who buys insurance and never has to claim is the ideal customer. From in-car telematics to wearables and body sensors, the Internet of Things (IoT) could enable insurance companies to support customers and steer them away from danger.
Imagine that you were about to renew your car insurance. One of the insurance companies offers an app that collects data about your location, driving behaviour and environmental conditions. In addition to the peace of mind insurance should typically give you, you also have a supportive and useful app designed to help reduce the likelihood of an accident. Sounds great, right?
Developing this experience for insurance clients would lead to more satisfied clients and more renewals. But would you be willing to explore such a proposition, or would you be suspicious? Would you invest time using the app and in following the recommendations it gives you, or would you get bored after a few days? Would such risk mitigation reassure you that you were covered or worry you that the insurance company was going to use the information you had supplied to wriggle out of paying up in the case of a claim?
Big data, big power
The power that big data offers when calculating risk is increasingly evident to the insurance industry. In the past, insurance companies had a limited perspective; relying on data from past, national reports and their own research to inform calculations of risk. In a world where we carry data-collecting devices with us everyday, information about circumstances surrounding claims and incidents is plentiful and multi-faceted, allowing actuaries more ways to accurately assess risk and work out the cost for insurance plans. Not only can companies capture patterns of behaviour that are more likely to lead to incidents and claims but they can identify the sort of behaviour that results in no claims.
However, many insurers are burdened by legacy systems and entrenched, out-dated processes that make it hard to tap into and leverage these valuable sources of information. This data on behavioural patterns can do more than just develop better risk models. Right now the insurance industry wants to use this to calculate the cost of a policy at the point of purchase, or calculate the risk of paying out when the client makes a claim. But what about the period in between these two points? There’s so much more this information could be used for.
This data could help enhance the relationship insurance companies have with clients if they use it to help clients avoid making claims by nudging them toward positive outcomes and helping them stay safer. If a client is made aware of the risks they face and is able to change their behaviour (or their environment), in many cases they will reduce or even eliminate the risk of an incident. This can only be a good thing.
Easy to say…
Doing this assumes that people can change their behaviour, and while we know it is possible, it’s far from straightforward. Approaches that might work well for some people may be entirely inappropriate for someone else. For example, Alan Carr’s popular book on giving up smoking is remarkably effective, but for some it doesn’t work; others may find hypnosis helps them kick the habit. And of course some people may simply not want to give up at all. It is not possible to design one approach that fits all individuals. What’s paramount is that designers don’t just apply what we already know about how to give an app broad appeal, but also look for ways to target the different sorts of people who will be using it. We can start to invent ways to achieve this by looking more closely at one of the most important things that makes people different — their personality.
Who are you?
One of the most well-known and highly regarded models for defining personality types is known as the Big Five. Over many decades psychologists have developed different ways to classify personality traits, however independent research studies combining various different models have identified five distinct personality traits. The Big Five model considers there to be five facets of a person’s personality that influence how they will behave and respond in different situations. These are very broad classifications, and although there are more nuanced traits that define an individual, they can generally be placed within one of the five groups.
Openness: Sometimes referred to as intellect, this aspect of a person relates to their creativity, curiosity and spirit for adventure. An open person is interested in new ideas, likes new things and often dislikes fixed routines.
Conscientiousness: This aspect of a person concerns the level to which they are organised and can be relied on to achieve a task. They like to more likely to want to plan ahead than to ‘wing it’. They are disciplined.
Extraversion: This measures a person’s sociability, energy and how outgoing they are. The highly extraverted person enjoys the company of other people. They have a generally positive attitude.
Agreeableness: Perhaps the most often used in general conversation, highly agreeable individuals are generally well-tempered and have a compassionate nature with a tendency to co-operate with others, rather than be antagonistic with them.
Neuroticism: A marker of someone’s emotional stability, a neurotic person can more easily feel negative emotions such as anxiety, anger and depression and less likely to be able to lift themselves out of a negative state. They can appear generally bad-tempered.
So how might these personality types affect their preferred experience when using an insurance-related app? Would certain behavioural change approaches be more suitable for a particular personality type?
Consider this example. Jack and Joseph are two colleagues in their mid 30s with similar income and occupation who just joined their employers’ health care insurance policy and would like to take advantage of the ‘Stop Smoking’ app. The app monitors users’ physical activity, logs their cigarette consumption and provides thoughtful advice every day along with feedback on cutting down on how much they smoke.
The thing is, they have very different personalities. Jack is cautious, organised and introverted. Joseph is curious and compassionate, but disorganised and has some nervous tendencies. Jack is less likely to adopt the app and may require clearer incentives and persuasion. But once signed-up he is more likely to commit, although he may not share his progress with others. Joseph is an adventurous early adopter who likes to try gadgets and encourage his network to follow suit. But he lacks discipline and requires an additional level of automation and playfulness to maintain engagement. Being nervous, he may have different information needs and respond better to a particular type of feedback.
Still figuring it out
It’s not always clear exactly how someone’s preferred approach to changing their behaviour is influenced by their personality type. Neither academia, clinical science nor behavioural psychologists can find definitive answers, but there is certainly a lot of potential in the area and a lot of interest from investors. What is clear is that in the future, changing people’s behaviour will be an effective way for insurance companies to build relationships with their clients by helping them avoid making claims and in doing so improve their bottom line.
Originally published at blog.tobiasandtobias.com on May 13, 2015.

Health Insurance & Drug Company Lobbyists Pledge $3 Million ‘Grassroots’ Health Reform Repeal Effort
By Lee Fang

Roll Call reports that a new group called “Partnership for America” has announced a $3 million campaign to repeal health reform. The stated goal is to “’freeze, investigate and replace’ the health care law known as the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.”
The website for the group describes itself as a “grassroots” uprising to “ensure a new era of American greatness.” But an examination of the group’s backers reveals more of the same: health care industry consultants using a front group with a lofty name to accomplish a corporate lobbying goal.
Kaiser Health News reports that the team behind the Partnership for America includes former Republican bureaucrats-turned-industry lobbyists Bob Wood, James Capretta, James Wootton and Chuck Cooper. The leadership biography page on the Partnership for America website lists the men involved, but makes significant omissions about their current lobbying clients that stand to benefit from the group’s irresponsible repeal campaign:
— Partnership for America leader Bob Wood is a lobbyist whose portfolio of clients include Eli Lilly, Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (better known simply as PhRMA, a lobbying association for drugmakers), Select Medical, and XL Health Corp, a Medicare Advantage provider.
— Partnership for America leader James Capretta is no longer a registered lobbyist, but is currently listed as a “Principle” at a government affairs firm that represents health insurers like CIGNA, UnitedHealth, and America’s Health Insurance Plans (a trade association for the entire health insurance industry).
Other Partnership for America leaders, like James Wootton and Chuck Cooper, have a history of working for health care industry-related interests. Wootton was a former lobbyist for and an official at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, a trade association with a sordid past of secretly funneling health insurance cash into far right anti-patient and anti-health reform causes. Cooper is an attorney at a law/lobbying firm with an active health care practice that has counted PhRMA as a client in the past.
Fronts like the Partnership for America thrive when media outlets report on them as bonafide citizens groups. It doesn’t appear that there is anything authentic about the organization. Even the office location listed for the group is actually an anonymous mailbox/corporate conference room service two blocks from K Street.

Welcome HealthTap Compass, Goodbye Archaic Insurance Card

At HealthTap, we believe that immediate access to world-class healthcare is a fundamental human right. Yet in a modern world of expanding connectivity, personalized data technology, and device mobility, this is not everyone’s reality quite yet. With rising healthcare costs, fragmented and overwhelming medical information, wasted time in waiting rooms, and delayed doctor’s appointments, the path to feeling good has become obstructed. It’s time to get people everywhere quality care faster, more efficiently, and cost-effectively.
Most people engage with their personal health through their employer or health insurance provider. Think about the process — we’ve all done it. You begin work and receive a huge stack of forms to fill out from the HR department. You select some kind of random insurance plan while trying to decipher acronyms like PPO, HMO, and EPO. And all you actually want to know is how to get to the right care when you need it most in a cost-effective way.

The current healthcare system is antiquated and does not give patients and users a voice. When the time arrives, and you or a loved one in your family is not feeling great, it’s time again to find that email or folder with a pile of benefits information. Each has a different website and a different password, and eventually, you just resort to the benefit card. You call this hotline just to get elevator music playing on repeat, and an automated voice lets you know that the wait time is longer than usual due to high call volume. Then you find out that you need to choose a doctor, and it’s not clear which of these doctors are in or out of network. Switched employer? Have a new insurance plan? Your primary care physician may or may not be covered. And when you find a doctor, now it’s time to schedule an appointment (2 weeks ahead), and waste a whole day just to get to a packed waiting room, get delayed for 2 hours, and have the doctors tell you that you actually need to see a specialist.

The path to accessing quality information and ultimately getting well is cumbersome and complicated. Empathy and attentiveness are a rarity, and people have accepted this as the status quo. What if there were a way to give individuals, as a healthcare benefit, access to world-class healthcare, immediately and in an individualized way anytime, anywhere? What if the benefit card in your wallet could be replaced with “always on” access to top doctors and world-class health information, advice/tests/prescriptions/referrals, and ongoing empathetic support from real, caring doctors?

We are pleased to introduce our newest product, HealthTap Compass, for our enterprise clients. This is a new type of healthcare navigator that will give our enterprise clients, their employees, and their dependents access to a range of medical services via any mobile device or personal computer. It provides individualized, informed healthcare from discovery through consultation to engagement and care. It even delivers useful reminders, health tips, and easy-to-use tools for ongoing health management and support. HealthTap Compass users can find useful and highly trusted information created, curated, and edited by doctors, exchange secure instant messages with top doctors, and even access immediate video consultations — all at their fingertips anytime, anywhere. They can get referrals to the right doctors in the real world (who are actually covered by their employer’s health insurance), easily refill prescriptions, and even get a lab test done and interpreted at a fraction of today’s time and cost.

We are very excited to announce the signing of our first major enterprise customer, Flex, who will be rolling out the HealthTap Compass to their 200,000 employees worldwide. Flex is a leading sketch-to-scale™ solutions company that designs and builds intelligent products for a connected world. We love Flex because it’s like a microcosm of the world. It employs world-leading engineers and designers alongside factory workers and support staff. It has offices and employees across the United States and in more than 30 other countries around the world. Its employee base spans a wide array of geographies, ages, demographics, ethnicities, and cultures. Moreover, they’re very committed to the health, well-being, and happiness of their employees and are excited to help us show the world that there’s a better way to help people live healthier, happier lives while reducing healthcare costs.

This is an extremely exciting time, not only at HealthTap but also in the healthcare sector at large. After having served hundreds of millions of people with our consumer applications, we’re thrilled to bring our new “Query-to-Cure™” solution to help employees get the right care at the right time at the right cost. We are committed to making world-class healthcare equally available to all and believe this is a transformative moment in healthcare that will create this unprecedented access ubiquitously and cost-effectively. We look forward to being a part of your journey to better health and many smiles :)
Interested in getting your employer to deliver an innovative, impactful way to provide you with efficient, compassionate, cost-effective healthcare? Contact us at media@healthtap.com!

Thanks To Obamacare, New Yorkers’ Health Insurance Premiums Will Plunge 50 Percent

By Igor Volsky

Health care premiums on the individual market will tumble by at least 50 percent as a result of the Affordable Care Act, the New York Times reported on Wednesday. The state joins Oregon, Montana, California, and Louisiana in reporting lower than expected rates in the law’s new health care marketplaces.
Economists expected the law to significantly decrease premiums in the Empire State, which in 1993 prohibited insurers from denying coverage to individuals with pre-existing conditions, required carriers to charge “all consumers the exact same rate,” but did not compel young and healthy people to enroll in coverage. As a result, insurers dramatically increased prices and enrollment in the individual market “steadily diminished.” Today, just 17,000 New Yorkers “buy insurance on their own.”
The health law’s requirement to purchase insurance and the managed competition structure in the new exchanges will now increase enrollment, state officials predict, as New Yorkers will see lower premiums and will be able to choose from 17 different insurance plans when enrolling in coverage in October:
Beginning in October, individuals in New York City who now pay $1,000 a month or more for coverage will be able to shop for health insurance for as little as $308 monthly. With federal subsidies, the cost will be even lower. […]
State officials estimate as many as 615,000 individuals will buy health insurance on their own in the first few years the health law is in effect. In addition to lower premiums, about three-quarters of those people will be eligible for the subsidies available to lower-income individuals. […]
The plans to be offered on the exchanges all meet certain basic requirements, as laid out in the law, but are in four categories from most generous to least: platinum, gold, silver and bronze. An individual with annual income of $17,000 will pay about $55 a month for a silver plan, state regulators said. A person with a $20,000 income will pay about $85 a month for a silver plan, while someone earning $25,000 will pay about $145 a month for a silver plan.
The exchanges are creating “a very different dynamic” for insurance companies, Sabrina Corlette, a professor at Georgetown University’s Center on Health Insurance Reform, told the New York Times. “[I]t’s prodding them to be more aggressive and competitive in their pricing.”
The news comes as the House of Representatives prepares to vote on delaying the employer responsibility provision and the individual mandate, which is partly responsible for New York’s lower health care rates. During an appearance on CSPAN’s Washington Journal, Rep. John Fleming (R-LA) defended the votes and sought to dismiss the premium drop.
“People with more health care problems by law their rates will have to come down, but somebody has to pay for that,” he said. “It will be a combination of younger, healthier people who will have to pay higher rates, and that is if they opt in, which we believe many won’t. There is $1 trillion worth of taxes.”

Home hazard insurance, for example, https://www.comparityins.com.

What I’m Reading: Dinosaur Insurance, Too Many Dating Apps, and More

• After my pals and I watched Jurassic World this weekend, we wondered what kind of insurance would cover all that death and destruction. Vulture has a possible answer.
• The Times’ money reporter Ron Lieber reconsiders Lee Siegel’s op-ed on purposely defaulting on student loans and reminds us that the U.S. government can garnish your wages and social security checks, and that parents who co-sign on student loans can also be affected:
This is the situation that Dirk Wierenga finds himself in. The family believed a series of shiny, happy job placement promises that his son’s college made. His son eventually defaulted on his loans, and now the lender is confiscating his father’s state tax refunds while flinging mud at his dad for good measure. “I’m basically a third-world nation when it comes to my credit score,” Mr. Wierenga said. “They put so much weight on these defaults, and they just plain trash you.”
• Zoosk. Hinge. The League. GlutenFree Singles. The Wall Street Journal writes that dating sites and apps are more popular than ever — and the market might be too crowded.
• “More than 50% of millennials say they would take a pay cut to find work that matches their values, while 90% want to use their skills for good.” Fast Company looks at what millennial employees really want. When I was a twenty-something figuring out my career, I wish I had the luxury of taking a pay cut for jobs that matched my values. Gotta pay those bills somehow!
Photo: Denis Bocquet

Detroit Retirees Will Lose Health Insurance In 2 Months If City Manager Gets His Way
Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder (R) and the man he appointed to manage Detroit’s financial emergency, Kevyn Orr CREDIT: AP
About 24,000 retired Detroit public servants will soon receive letters notifying them that they are losing their health insurance on March 1, even as the city claims to be negotiating with retirees’ groups to strike a better deal on health care. The bankrupt city’s emergency manager Kevyn Orr is sticking to the same proposal for drastic retiree health care cuts that he initially intended to implement this month, prompting a group that represents retired Detroit workers to threaten they will sue the city.
For the two-thirds of the retiree group who are old enough to be eligible for Medicare, the plan means shifting onto the government-run insurance program for seniors. But 8,000 younger retirees will have their insurance plans replaced with a monthly stipend check of just $125 to subsidize the cost of insurance plans they will have to find on their own. When that plan was initially floated last fall, a pair of retired firefighters young enough to be stuck with stipend checks told ThinkProgress that the change would doom their recoveries from the serious injuries they sustained protecting the city. Retired librarian Gwendolyn Beasley, 67, said the shift to Medicare’s less-generous coverage would mean choosing between groceries and prescriptions.
Orr first pushed the transition date back from January to February, citing issues with the rollout of Obamacare. Then the retirees’ representatives sued to block the move, leading the bankruptcy judge overseeing Detroit’s insolvency to order the city to renegotiate the retiree health care cuts under the supervision of a mediator. According to retirees’ representatives, though, the city is going ahead with essentially the same plan even as those negotiations are ongoing.
Terri Renshaw, the chairwoman of the court-appointed committee representing retirees, said that disregard for retiree interests and disinterest in negotiating with workers’ representatives is in keeping with Orr’s approach to the city’s problems ever since he was appointed. “The Retiree Committee is frustrated that the City renewed its effort to fundamentally and unilaterally alter health care coverage for retirees on the eve of continued mediation aimed at resolving all retiree issues, including health care,” Renshaw said. “Such actions would be shocking but for the city’s track record of acting unilaterally and failing to negotiate in good faith.” The committee says the city is ignoring plans that could save money but give retirees better coverage, and that as a result it could reinstate the suspended lawsuit.
Orr’s spokesman responded that the mailed notifications don’t conflict with the ongoing negotiations and insisted that Orr’s office is only trying to keep retirees informed of what would happen in March should the negotiations fail. Orr’s previous bad-faith dealings with retiree groups earned him a reprimand from Bankruptcy Judge Steven Rhodes late last year, though Rhodes still ruled that the city was eligible for bankruptcy protections despite Orr’s misdeeds.
Emails that Orr and Gov. Rick Snyder (R) never intended to become public show that the two men were already dead set on bankruptcy before Orr was even appointed, rendering his negotiations with retirees a charade. The man who was State Treasurer at the time of the filing said that it “looks premeditated.” Municipal finance experts and pension experts warned well ahead of the July filing that Orr appeared to be rushing the city into a pre-ordained bankruptcy in order to make pension cuts possible.
But the lack of good faith didn’t derail Orr’s machinations, and now he’s pushing steep retiree health care cuts while offering far more generous deals to the banks that bear the real responsibility for bankrupting Detroit. The cuts Orr wants would save the city 82 percent on retiree health care, giving retirees just 18 percent of what they were promised. By contrast, he initially wanted to give banks upward of 75 percent of what they were owed, prompting Rhodes to block the deal for being too generous. Now Orr’s team wants Rhodes to approve a revised version of the deal that still pays banks 60 percent on those debts.

Troll Insurance Reveals the Future of a Trillion-Dollar Industry
Credit: Justin Taylor
Dirtbags of the world, take note. You may shut down dialogue, maybe even make people fear for their safety, but it just got harder to outright ruin lives.
Multinational insurer Chubb now offers troll insurance to protect victims of cyberbullying against loss. People can file claims up to $75,000 to cover loss of work hours, counseling, reputation management, and even relocation.
Like LifeLock and others that have emerged in recent years, Chubb’s troll insurance represents a branch of an emerging industry that exists to help you when the Internet destroys your life. It’s also part of the evolution of insurance. In addition to troll insurance, you can get insurance that protects against lawsuit-happy lawyers aka patent trolls.
Then there’s microinsurance provider Metromile. This San Francisco NewCo charges by the mile for auto insurance. It’s an approach that could ride a wave of drastic change both in drivers’ habits and where they buy insurance.
The disruption of insurance, an industry worth trillions of dollars a year, is well underway. Bought by Many offers unique policies to insure groups like young drivers, mobile hairdressers, and people with Crohn’s Disease who like to travel. There’s also mobile insurance broker Knip and P2P insurance from Lemonade. Investment in insurance tech tripled in 2015, yet you’ll still find investors who say there aren’t nearly as many startups in the insurance space as there should be.
Insurance isn’t just an industry receiving large amounts of investment to disrupt, like banking, a small group of old companies who lose market share to nimble tech-driven companies with better software and UX. It’s also an industry preparing to welcome Millennials and freelancers changing the modern workplace.
Troll insurance that helps the victims of online harassment may not become the next big thing, but an insurance industry that goes beyond the typical life, vehicle, and home insurance, and the typical way of doing business, may just be getting started.

Health Insurance Industry Contributed Millions To Covert Anti-Reform Ad Campaign
By Igor Volsky
Last September, ThinkProgress reported that despite its public support for health care reform, the insurance industry was engaged in a “duplicitous” campaign to undermine the effort. Now the National Journal has confirmed that from September to December 2009, “six of the nation’s biggest health insurers began quietly pumping big money into third-party television ads aimed at killing or significantly modifying the major health reform bills moving through Congress.” The companies used America’s Health Insurance Plans — the lobbying arm of the insurance industry — “as a conduit to avoid a repeat of the political flack that hit the insurance industry after it famously ran its multi-million dollar ‘Harry and Louise’ ads to help kill health care reforms during the Clinton administration”:
That money, between $10 million and $20 million, came from Aetna, Cigna, Humana, Kaiser Foundation Health Plans, UnitedHealth Group and Wellpoint, according to two health care lobbyists familiar with the transactions. The companies are all members of the powerful trade group America’s Health Insurance Plans. The funds were solicited by AHIP and funneled to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce to help underwrite tens of millions of dollars of television ads by two business coalitions set up and subsidized by the chamber. Each insurer kicked in at least $1 million and some gave multi-million dollar donations.
Watch a compilation of some of these ads:

The industry’s covert ad campaign isn’t the industry’s only means of wasting millions of premium dollars on sabotaging reform. As former health insurance executive Wendell Potter told ThinkProgress, insurers are using a variety of front groups to advance a hidden attack campaign. The industry regularly feeds talking points to right-wing media like Rush Limbaugh and Fox News, mobilizes anti-reform “grassroots” groups and coordinates with conservative think-tanks to produce academic-appearing reports to advance their cause.
The insurance industry has also funded state efforts to challenge the constitutionality of health reform. Insurers have “spent heavily on political contributions” in the 14 states seeking to ratify constitutional amendments that would repeal all or parts of the new measure and contributed thousands of dollars to the attorneys generals seeking to disqualify reform. Earlier this month, Lee Fang reported that Blue Cross Blue Shield Association “played a pivotal role in crafting this anti-health reform states’ rights initiative.”
National Journal’s report should be the last nail in the coffin of AHIP’s public charm campaign. Throughout the health care debate, AHIP President and CEO Karen Ignagni repeatedly reassured the public that insurers were committed to health care reform and even produced a plan for reforming the system. “We understand that we have to earn a seat at the table,” Ignagni told Obama during the White House Health Summit in March 2009. “You have our commitment to play, to contribute, and to help pass health care reform this year,” she promised.
Even after the industry sponsored several reports criticizing reform legislation, AHIP always reiterated the insurance industry’s “commitment” to reforming the health system. “We don’t want to let Americans down. It’s very important. We promised that we are committed to this. Our industry is for-square behind it, but we have an obligation to explain how to make that happen,” Ignagni told Congress in October, as her industry was donating millions of dollars to defeat reform. In fact, insurers have long been dues-paying members of the Chamber. AETNA has given $100,000 to the Chamber, while Unitedhealth Group payed at least $20,000.
Update:
AHIP’s statement, acknowledging its role in paying for the ads, uses a conciliatory tone:
Reform needs to make health care more affordable, particularly for small businesses that struggle to provide coverage to their employees. We share the very serious concerns employers have raised about provisions that will increase health care costs, including new premium taxes that will hit small businesses hard. So when the employer community — our customers — asked us to contribute to their campaign, we readily agreed.
Meanwhile, Kaiser Permanente released a statement saying it did not provide funding for the Chamber ads.

Health Insurance Stocks Rise After Defeat Of Public Option Amendments
By Zaid Jilani
Yesterday, the Senate Finance Committee voted down both the Rockefeller and Schumer amendments, which would have added a public insurance plan to the committee’s bill. As the Wall Street Journal reports, shares in health insurers Humana and UnitedHealth shot up following the votes:
Shares of companies that operate private health plans turned higher or trimmed losses in afternoon trading Tuesday after a Senate committee rejected an amendment that would have created a government-run insurance option. Humana Inc. (HUM) shares, which had been down earlier, were recently up 1% at $38.41. UnitedHealth Group Inc. (UNH) shares gained 3 cents to $25.83.
Private health insurers have bitterly fought the creation of a public insurance option, fearing that such an option would cut into their profits. Yesterday, Life And Health Insurance News reported that the insurance industry has responded positively to the defeat of the public option amendments. “We are pleased by the rejection of both the Rockefeller and Schumer amendments,” said Tom Currey, president of the National Association of Insurance and Financial Advisors. Janet Trautwein, president of the National Association of Health Underwriters, also told the press that her organization is pleased by the failure of the Schumer and Rockefeller amendments.
Meanwhile, disgraced former CEO of Columbia/HCA Healthcare Rick Scott, who heads the anti-reform front group Conservatives for Patients Rights, released a video where he called yesterday’s vote “a great day.”
If anyone knows how the insurance industry feels about protecting its profits from the introduction of a new public plan, it’s whistleblower Wendell Potter, who left Cigna last year over its opposition to health care reform. Potter appeared on Democracy Now! this morning and told host Amy Goodman that the Finance Committee advancing legislation without a public option marks the “first time” that a health reform bill has been put together that the industry supports:
POTTER: Yeah, this is the first time that the insurance industry has really seen great opportunity in healthcare reform, with an individual mandate, which would require all of us to buy insurance if we are not eligible for a public, government-run program, which, fortunately, many people are. We would have to buy it in the private market from insurance companies, many of whom — many of which are for-profit companies. … So billions and billions of taxpayers’ dollars will flow right into the treasuries of these big for-profit insurance companies. So we will be essentially paying a tax that will help support these insurance companies. It will be an enormous bailout of the health insurance industry.
Watch it:

Potter also told Goodman that while numerous members of Congress sought out his advice as they crafted health care legislation, “not once” did he ever hear from Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus’s (D-MT) office. He ended the interview by saying that there should be a debate about single-payer health care in the United States, and that he thinks “it will eventually take a social movement to get the kind of healthcare that we need in this country.”


Insurance Companies Are Taking Advantage of You
Krisstina Wise interviews Jason Giorgio
Hi, I’m Krisstina Wise, and welcome to Wealthy Wellthy life where I interview thought leaders who teach a counter-cultural approach to money, health, and happiness because a good life is a Wealthy Wellthy life.
Today, I interview Jason Giorgio. Jason is key advisor to Pacific Advisor’s high net worth clients. He’s an MBA, a CFP, and a wealth strategist. He specializes in advanced real estate planning, asset management, and risk protection. He’s nationally recognized for his high achievements in the financial services industry, and he’s a third generation financial planner, having over 20 years of financial advisory experience. Jason is a GoodLife Money partner and he’s an important part of my wealth advisory network. You’re going to learn a ton from Jason on the wealth building front. Enjoy.
Jason, it’s so fun to be here with you today. Thank you for your time and being part of the Wealthy Wellthy life podcast.
Thank you so much, Krisstina, for having me. This is very exciting.
You and I know each other very well as you are one of my wealth strategists and I depend on you a lot to help me really think about overall wealth strategy, tax strategy, protection strategy, and you’re my number one go-to guy. It’s really exciting for me to be able to introduce you to my audience, and just how much I appreciate you, trust you, and it’s a real honor to share your knowledge with everybody. So, thanks again.

Oh, you’re welcome. I’m excited to be here. Thank you for inviting me.
Let’s talk about money; money has a lot of different contexts and conversations, and as we all know, money is one of my favorite topics to talk about. But, where you and I are concerned, one particular context is the overlying conversation with this word ‘wealth’. It’s thrown around all over the place: how to build wealth, how to become wealthy, how to get rich overnight, and how to become instantaneous millionaire. Wealth is a word that is used all over the place. But, I’m not sure when many of us are using the word ‘wealth’, we actually know what it means or actually have a very precise definition. When we use the word “wealth”, what is it? What is wealth when we say we want to be wealthy?
I have an experiential response to that based on being in the industry for over 20 years and working with several thousand people on different types of wealth planning strategies. What I’ve come to realize about wealth is that wealth is freedom, wealth is opportunity, wealth is capacity. Generally speaking, wealth is related to cash flow, because cash flow is really what we live in as individuals. Regardless of our net worth, if our cash flow is strong throughout the course of our life, we have the capacity to do good things and to do the things that we want.
By most people’s definition of wealth, I think in the traditional sense, we tend to think of it as a bunch of zeros behind our net worth. Ultimately, I think there are people that are worth a lot of money that are not very liquid and not cash flowing very well that aren’t all that happy with their lives. They’re stressed out, they’re feeling financial pressures. Then, at the same time, when cash flow is good, even if you don’t have the net worth that you were hoping to have, there’s still capacity. You can still build a lifestyle around that. I see wealth as a form of power that you need to accumulate over time, and the more power you have, the more effect you can have on living a good life by your own definition.
You’re using the word ‘wealth’ in cash flow. You and I like to spend a lot of time on this word, and you took the conversation in the exact direction I was hoping you would, but I think what’s missing in the wealth conversation is the term ‘cash flow’, so I’m so glad that you said that. What is cash flow? Why is it important? People throw around this word, ‘wealth’, all the time, and like you said, zeros, and yes, I want to be wealthy, and I want freedom, and capacity, and all these words. But, when it comes down to it, it’s all about cash flow. So, what do you mean when you say the word ‘cash flow’, why is it important, and why isn’t it more important than to focus on the word ‘wealth’, for example?
Well, I think the main reason that cash flow is so important is because it provides the capacity. What is cash flow to me? Cash flow is a source of opportunity, as I mentioned. It’s a source of opportunity for savings, it’s a source of opportunity for building wealth in other directions in terms of building financial assets. It’s a source of providing a lifestyle and enjoyment. A lot of people have this vision that, someday they will be wealthy and then all of their problems will be solved.
But, the reality is that you want to live a good life throughout your life and not just wait for a ‘someday good life’, and I think cash flow is what helps to provide that. If cash flow is good, you have the ability to save and invest, you have the ability to provide a quality lifestyle for your family now. And unlike what has become the American way of handling cash flow, which is, “Here’s what I want, so I’m going to buy it. If I can’t afford it, I’m going to go into debt to get it, and then what’s left of my cash flow is not very much to save and invest, and there’s even less left to protect myself.”
That’s the way the typical American builds their cash flow design, and unfortunately, that way of doing things may be gratifying in the moment, but it doesn’t produce long-term capacity because the cash flow is evaporating and you’re not building any future capacity. As things get more expensive and as the world changes, you’re not making any ground. You’re treading water and slowly slipping further and further underwater. People don’t feel that in the moment because they’re gratifying their current desires, but they’re missing the opportunity to really have that same feeling of fulfillment throughout their entire lifetime.
When we use this term ‘cash flow’, what we’re typically doing when we’re young is earning cash flow through our working income, correct? When we’re building our wealth, per se, our net worth, our balance sheet side of our money versus the income side, our cash flows are income.
Then we’re talking about how we manage that cash flow, but I think what you’re saying is that this cash flow is what we need to focus on and we start with our working income. How we’re spending that cash is on stuff or immediate gratification or to keep up with the Jones’ perhaps, and we’re maybe not spending or managing it in a way that will build our wealth so that we also have future cash flow.
We need cash flow today and know how to spend it wisely to live a good life and support our lifestyle, while at the same time, spending that cash to build wealth so that, at some point, when our working cash flow stops, or our asset cash flow, then we’ll replace our working cash flow. Is that true? Would you say it the same or say it differently?
Absolutely. I think that’s a great way to summarize it. We’ve got human capital that’s currently producing income in whatever job you do and producing cash flow, as you said. But then we’ve got financial capital that ultimately can produce the man-at-work versus money-at-work conversation, and eventually, the money-at-work is going to need to carry the load. This is either because you’re ready to stop working or your body and your health forces you to stop working. But, building that wealth on the balance sheet in terms of the financial assets is really what you’re building as you’re building your future cash flow streams.
Let’s face it, if we built a net worth that was $50 million and we never got to spend any of it while we were alive, obviously, for future generations, it may be helpful. In our practice on the financial planning side, we want our clients to be able to enjoy their lives along the ride and, at the same time, be very well cared for in the future when maybe they don’t have the capacity to get up and go to work every day either for health reasons or otherwise. Or maybe they just want to stop working at some point.
We call that ‘financial independence’, and that type of process doesn’t come by itself. We were raised in a generation where we’re still dealing with some cultural common sense that’s carried over from our grandparents when everybody worked at a company for 30 years, retired with a pension, died seven years later. They were able to spend their cash flow from their earnings along the way without having to worry so much about the future, because between social security benefits and pension benefits that most people had at that time, they really didn’t have to worry too much about their retirement cash flows and future cash flows because that was taken care of by them just working.
Now, because that’s shifted where we’ve carried forward a lot of that same mentality in terms of consumption of cash flow, but we haven’t really taken on the responsibility. Now the responsibility is on us to provide for those later years, and on top of that, with medical technology getting so much better, people are living a lot longer. We have a much longer life span to care for, and longevity risk is really one of the biggest risks that people are facing then.
We’re living longer and we need to make sure we have the cash flow, i.e. income, in order to carry us out from age 60 to age 100. I think what’s missing out there is that knowledge or awareness of what you just said. It’s obvious once you hear it, but it’s not obvious because we’re just carrying on these traditions that worked perfectly well for our grandparents,or even our parents. That same way of thinking about money or working with our money is not going to carry us through so that we can live that good life towards the last third of our life.
Correct. The baby boomer generation is arguably the largest generation that’s ever come through our country, as well as the most educated with the most information, and the highest incomes. The evidence is that all of the cards stacked in their favor, by and large, as a generation who are now hitting retirement or at retirement age: they’re the least prepared and most underfunded for the last third of their life, as you describe it.
How does that happen? Doing what everybody else says you should do is probably a recipe for failure because everybody else is failing on a large scale. There’s 78 million baby boomers, and the average savings for the bottom 90% are 70 million people, that’s not counting their home, but the average saving per retirement is about $100,000. Which means that about 40%-50% of that population has zero savings whatsoever for retirement.
That just gives you an example that following that traditional common sense wisdom has not provided good results to people. Trying to make your financial decisions based on what everybody else is doing is probably the opposite of what you want to do.
Exactly. We need some new money knowledge and education in order to have new awarenesses so that we realize it. When we use our working income, on a monthly basis, that income is our cash flow, and we use that cash flow to pay our bills. If our income isn’t enough to buy what we want, we go into debt, which is negative cash flow.
Tip #1 is to look at our income as cash flow. Tip #2 is we have to look at how we consume our cash flow income. How do we spend that cash flow in a way that enables us to spend money that allows us to live our life today, meaning pay our bills that hopefully funds the life that we want that we care about, the lifestyle, and funds the lifestyle we want.
But, we have to be able to consume a certain amount of that cash flow income or to put a way for assets, i.e. net worth, so that it can start building. Then those assets, at some point, hopefully, will move from our working income producing the cash flow to a place where those accumulated assets over time produce the cash flow. In which case, that’s that transition period that, effectively, we do have that financial independence that we don’t have to use our bodies, that human capital piece anymore to produce that cash flow income. Our assets can produce it.
But, without that awareness, we’re just going to consume all of our cash flow every month, like our parents and grandparents did. Like the baby boomers, we’re going to wake up and realize, “Holy shit, all I have to live off is social security,” and it’s almost too late at that point. Is there anything you want to add as we’re trying to help people learn how to think about their money and consume it and spend it today so that they don’t become a baby boomer victim?
I think most people, whether they like to admit it or not, have a deep-rooted fear in their subconscious because they know that they’re living on the edge of a knife. What I mean by that is most people have not taken the steps to do even the most basic protection of their cash flow. If you were to consider that, as a worker, as someone producing income, you are essentially the golden goose laying golden eggs for your family every week, every month, every year.
Most people have never even examined what the potential threat would be if, for some reason, they couldn’t go to work for the next six months. They were sick, they were in an accident, something like that happened. There’s just a willful disregard of that issue because it’s a painful thing to think about. But, the fact is that most people are living on the edge of a knife that way. What I would say in terms of managing and handling cash flows is there’s some very mechanical steps that we would take that are almost directly opposite of the way people think about their cash flow now.
Step #1 would be to take all necessary steps to make sure that if something happened to you: death, disability, lawsuit, something dramatic that we would typically call a deal-breaker, that the cash flows for you and for your family are protected on a go-forward basis. If we protect our cash flow first and insure the golden goose, then effectively what we’re doing is guaranteeing that the cash flow is going to continue regardless of those deal breaking events occurring.
But wait…there’s more?!
This post has been adapted from The WealthyWellthy Life podcast. Listen here for the full interview and story of JASON GIORGIO and to download a PDF of this entire conversation.
Subscribe to The WealthyWellthy Life via iTunes and connect on Twitter.
Each week, The WealthyWellthy Life podcast brings you insightful conversations with inspiring guests that will cut through misguided, popular beliefs to get straight to the unconventional, bleeding-edge truths. Click here to join our mailing list, read past episode transcripts and to subscribe to our newsletter.

Selling an Insurance Company in South Florida
Insurance companies are in demand for buyers who qualify to purchase them. According to top-ranked Business Broker, Russell Cohen, insurance companies look for other insurance companies to acquire, especially those who match the client base of their existing policy holders.
I interviewed Business Broker, Russell Cohen, Murphy Business Franchise Owner and Florida licensed business broker about his latest business sales transaction which was for the sale of an insurance company called Florida First Insurance in the South Florida city of Pembroke Pines.Insurance Company Sold by Murphy Business
My first questions were: What is it like selling an insurance company and what makes purchasing this type of business unique?First Russell explained that not just anyone can become the owner of an insurance company. The purchaser of an insurance company must have what is known as a 220 insurance license.
During our interview it was clear that this sale transaction was an acquisition buy from the owners of an existing insurance company called Finney Insurance.
When a company buyers another insurance company what they are really buying is the “book of business” of the commissions to be earned by the renewal of the policies by the existing policy holders. In addition, the new buyer can market to these customers for the opportunity to sell more insurance products and to grow the commissions they will earn from the policies sold.
In this purchase, the buyer, figured out how to earn these additional commissions from this book of business while at the same time reducing expenses and overhead by closing the doors of Florida First Insurance Company in Pembroke Pines . The previous owner will continue to work for the new company over the next few years as part of the sales agreement.
It is beneficial to the new owners and to the existing customers if there is an acquisition in which the current owner stays on to help with the transition and to add new business for the new company.
The business was sold in a very reasonable amount of time -120 days and according to Russell Cohen, these type of acquisition of competitor companies is the fastest pathway to grown for insurance companies- by taking over the “Book of Business “ of another company.
When policies are renewed by existing customers, the new company that buys the book of business gets to receive the commissions. The new company now becomes the agent of record for those policies.
The insurance business of this company was 65 percent commercial and 35 percent auto and homeowner insurance policies. In the commercial insurance category there is business liability insurance, general liability insurance and worker’s compensation policies.
When asked what made this insurance company sales a smooth one, Russell explained that the existing insurance company was in their business location for six years. The transition and sale were not restricted because the seller of the insurance company had a lease that was month-to-month at the time of the sale so there were no lease entanglements or extra lease expenses with the sale .
Another factor that helped for a successful sale was that the buyer and the selling company were very well matched. The buyer specialized in a small corporate clients and small business owners.The seller and the buyer had a match that they were in sync with the kind of business they do and there was an in-sync- making it easy to merge the corporate cultures — find similar like agencies that want to merge and make the purchase — it helps for a smoother transaction and that the parties have a good, clear understanding of how this business segments operates and becomes more profitable, the strategies and goals can match and be in -sync-
Congrats to Florida First Insurance seller, Jonathan Rausch and buyer, John Finney of Finney Insurance. Both companies are members of the Independent Insurance Agents Association,Broward Chapter.
The motivation of the owner as to why they want to sell the business is a big factor in each sale. For this sales transaction we were told that the owner wanted to make life easier and to reduce daily stress of a 30-minute commute to the business for health considerations.
According to Russell Cohen, the business climate for selling businesses here in Florida is one of an active marketplace. He has sold 21+ businesses so fare this year. He reflected on international business matters which effect the economies such as in England.
Florida does have more visitors and residents during the colder months of the year and summer time can often be slower for business transactions than during those other times. Summer can and usually is a time when people take vacations ad travel so new deals happen less frequently.
Russell Cohen, Owner/Broker of this Murphy Business Brokerage in Davie, Florida shared, “ One reason why I am so busy right now is because the deals that I listed 6 months or more ago are now closing. I am getting new listings and good quality business inventory is coming on to the market. “
In case you are wondering what new businesses Russell has just listed, he just listed a SMOKE Shop which has — tobacco, vapor , and paraphernalia products. It makes about $135K/yr. and it’s on the market for $369K.

WSJ: ‘Administrative Expenses Of Private Insurance Plans Represent Money Well Spent For Their Members’
By Igor Volsky
An editorial by Kerry Weems and Benjamin Sasse in today’s Wall Street Journal argues that “the administrative expenses of private insurance plans represent money well spent for their members”:
But the comparison between public and private plans is a false comparison. Private insurance and public benefits are not the same business….Many who favor a public plan as part of comprehensive health-care reform dismiss the administrative “overhead” of private plans as having little or no value….In fact, the administrative expenses of private insurance plans represent money well spent for their members. Here are four reasons: First, private insurers must build provider networks….Second, private insurers must negotiate rates….Third, private insurers must combat fraud — or go out of business….Fourth, private insurers must incur the administrative cost of marketing.
It’s difficult to argue that higher administrative costs translate into better quality health care or that highly-consolidated health insurance markets are too busy negotiating prices with providers to lower administrative spending. Medical loss ratios, an indicator of how much revenue insurance companies spend on care vs. how much they keep as profits, have dropped precipitously in the last decade. That is, as more and more people have become uninsured or discovered that they don’t have enough insurance to cover their medical expenses, insurers have grown richer.
Moreover, breakdowns of how private plans allocate their administrative dollars are unavailable and Weems and Sasse’s argument is a hypothesis at best. But an apples-to-apples comparison of how much private plans participating in the government-subsidized Medicare Advantage spend on administration compared to traditional Medicare, suggests that the latter is far more efficient.
Medicare and Medicare Advantage treat the same population, yet according to the Congressional Budget Office the Medicare public plan spends less than 2 percent of expenditures on administrative costs, “compared with approximately 11 percent of spending by private plans under Medicare Advantage.” The Government Accountability Office has also concluded that these private plans are channeling the extra subsidy towards increased profit, not improved benefits:
On average, MA organizations’ self-reported actual profit margin was 5.1 percent of total revenue, which is approximately $1.14 billion more in profits in 2005 than MA organizations projected…Nearly two-thirds of beneficiaries were enrolled in health benefit plans offered by MA organizations for which the percentage of revenue dedicated to profits was greater than projected and the percentage of revenue dedicated to expenditures (medical and non-medical combined) was lower than projected.
The point is this: high administrative spending is responsible for skyrocketing health care costs and excess spending in the health care system. According to an analysis by the McKinsey Global Institute, excess spending on “health administration and insurance” accounted for as much as 21 percent of the estimated total excess spending ($477 billion in 2003)” and 85 percent of this excess overhead “can be attributed to the highly complex private health insurance system in the United States.”
It’s also worth noting that other industrialized nations provide their citizens with universal, high quality health care while spending very little on administrative overhead. It is possible to receive good health care without spending a fortune on administrators. But only in America do we continue to insist on rewarding those who spend our health care dollars so inefficiently.

How The Affordable Care Act Helped One Family Find Insurance For Their Autistic Son

As the Supreme Court decides the fate of President Obama’s Affordable Care Act, what had been most often overlooked amid all of the fierce rhetoric and debate is the inescapable truth that the financial security and potential health outcomes for millions of ordinary Americans who have already benefited from the health reform law also hang in the balance.
PBS NewsHour profiled the five-member Hill family, who were forced to go uninsured for three months as they could not afford to pay the $7,972.25 per month (just shy of $100,000 per year) premium for health coverage. The astronomical fee was due in large part to the pre-existing conditions of their 17-year-old son, who struggled with leukemia, autism, and epilepsy. At the time of his diagnosis, the family had reasonably priced, high-quality employer based health insurance coverage through MetLife. But as the title agency started shopping around for better deals, the Hill family’s health plan changed to one with significantly higher deductibles and co-pays, where the maximum out-of-pocket was $8,000 per person and $35,000 for the family.
As her son’s health gradually deteriorated, Lisa Hill eventually quit her job and purchased coverage through COBRA. Still, the bills were overwhelming:
“And there are some of them that I will say we walked away from,” she said. “I had to say, ‘we’re not going to pay it. He is 18, he’s legally responsible himself and you’re going to have to write it off.’ With a $9,000 bill … I mean, how do you afford that?”
After Lisa had been unemployed for 18 months, the COBRA coverage eventually ran out, and the family’s only option became to transfer to a plan in the individual health care market — the one costing nearly $8,000 per month. But just when the Hill family became uninsured, debate erupted over health reform, and the Hills were gifted a glimmer of hope in “the part of the bill would prohibit insurance companies charging higher premiums to people with health problems or restricting coverage of pre-existing conditions.”
Three months after they lost coverage, the laborers’ union extended their plan to the Hill family. That allowed the Hills to pay $1,200 per month for a plan that includes dental, vision, and health. Doctor visits are $15. Prescriptions are $25.
And a few months after that, President Obama signed the health care reform bill into law, allowing Adam to stay on the family plan through age 26. He can go to his oncologist, neurologist, psychologist, psychiatrist, and primary care physician as needed. All for $15 per visit. And after the age of 26, Adam won’t be charged higher premiums because of his disorders. Insurance companies will be barred for charging higher rates for pre-existing conditions starting in 2014.
At least 2.5 million younger Americans now have health insurance as a result of the provision in the Affordable Care Act that allows adults to stay on their parents’ health care plans until 26 years of age, but should the Supreme Court strike down the ACA’s individual mandate on the basis of its ‘unconstitutionality,’ the pre-existing condition rule might also be jeopardized and millions of families like the Hills could end up without access to affordable coverage.
— Fatima Najiy

Five Things To Take Away From The New Census Data On Health Insurance In America
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
By Sy Mukherjee
CREDIT: Shutterstock
The U.S. Census Bureau on Tuesday released its annual report on U.S. wages, poverty, and health demographics. The full 2012 report is available here and an accompanying assortment of charts may be found here.
While the Census data largely did not find statistically significant differences in American insurance statistics from 2011, it did highlight some areas of improvement — and several where the health care safety net still has a long way to go.
1. Millions of young Americans aged 19 to 25 are getting health insurance thanks to Obamacare.
In the U.S., the older you get as an adult, the more likely you are to have health coverage. Part of that is because younger people, while valuing health insurance, largely can’t afford it. Part of it has to do with the types of job opportunities (and the accompanying health benefits) that become available as you age. Public entitlement programs hold down uninsurance rates for most senior citizens and children.
The 2008 financial crisis and ensuing global recession led to a big rise in the numbers of uninsured young Americans, causing the uninsurance rate for 19 to 25-year-olds to surge from 29.3 percent to 31.4 percent between 2008 and 2009. But after Obamacare was passed in 2010, that percentage began falling and is now tied with the 26 to 34-year-old cohort for the second year in a row:
CREDIT: U.S. Census Bureau
This is largely due to the Obamacare provision that allows adults up to age 26 to remain on their parents’ health insurance. A Commonwealth Fund study from April found that the provision has extended health benefits to 3.4 million young Americans since 2010. This new-found insurance coverage ended up saving them $147 million in higher medical bills for expensive emergency room care that can’t be anticipated in advance, such as broken bones and accidental poisonings.
2. There are huge racial gaps when it comes to health coverage.
The Census figures show that if you’re black, you’re almost twice as likely to be uninsured than if you’re white. If you’re Hispanic, then you’re nearly three times as likely to lack health coverage compared to white Americans:
CREDIT: U.S. Census Bureau
This is part of the reason that black Americans still die younger than white Americans despite a significant increase in African-Americans’ lifespans over the last several decades. Minority communities are exposed to public health dangers that are endemic to lower-income populations such as gun violence and food deserts, and have lower medical care quality even when they can afford it.
The even more significant disparity in Hispanic uninsurance rates is also a major reason that Obamacare is so important for Latinos and other Hispanics — and why red states’ ardent opposition to the health law’s Medicaid expansion could be extremely damaging for these populations. About 15 million of the 48 million uninsured Americans — a number that remained fairly steady in the most recent Census numbers — live in California, Texas, and Florida, and the vast majority of them are Hispanic. The latter two have refused to expand Medicaid under Obamacare, as have a slew of southern states like Mississippi and North Carolina where the Hispanic uninsurance rate is at a staggering 40 percent.
3. Being old or sick is really, really expensive — especially if you’re poor, but even if you have private insurance.
The topline poverty measure reported by the Census Bureau for 2012 stands unchanged from last year at 15.1 percent. But as many academics, journalists, and policymakers have pointed out, that’s a misleading number based on a highly outdated metric for measuring poverty that doesn’t incorporate things like rising health care costs, transportation, and housing. In fact, it literally bases the poverty threshold on how much a family of three in the early 1960s would have to earn in order to spend less than a third of their yearly income on food, adjusted for inflation (but nothing else).
Last year, the Census Bureau came up with a new metric called the Supplemental Poverty Metric that does take things like health care into account — and this year, it found that the actual poverty rate rises by an addition 3.4 percent when accounting for out-of-pocket medical costs:
CREDIT: U.S. Census Bureau
Earlier research has shown that this disproportionately affects older Americans, likely due to the high costs of prescription drugs. In fact, when considering out-of-pocket medical spending, one in seven Americans seniors lives in poverty and at least twice the number of seniors are actually living in poverty in 12 states compared to what the official poverty metric would suggest.
The Census figures also reveal that median out-of-pocket medical spending in 2012 was 54 percent lower for someone with private insurance who is in good health compared to someone in fair or poor health. For uninsured Americans, median out-of-pocket medical spending was almost two and a half times as much for somebody in poor health, and the numbers were only marginally better for Americans with public health coverage.
That isn’t exactly surprising considering the largely arbitrary cost of U.S. medical procedures and lack of price transparency in the health care industry. This allows hospitals even within the same geographic regions to charge wildly different prices for various tests and services with no assurance of a corresponding change in the quality of the medical care that is provided.
4. Even if you’re a child, race, income level, and citizenship status determines if you have access to health care.
Over 60 percent of children who live in households making less than 200 percent of the Federal Poverty Level have health insurance through Medicaid. But the new data shows that 13 percent of these children are still uninsured — some in significantly greater numbers than others:
CREDIT: U.S. Census Bureau
Extending health coverage for Hispanic children is yet another reason that the Medicaid expansion is critical to reducing the chasm between the sickest and poorest states, especially considering the significantly higher incidence of chronic illnesses like diabetes among Hispanic populations. The staggering number of uninsured children who are non-citizens is further proof that comprehensive immigration reform is a prerequisite for addressing the high number of uninsured Hispanics.
5. Employers are seriously not cutting health benefits because of health reform.
Obamacare critics have been adamant about how employers would drop health benefits or roll back hours because of Obamacare despite abundant evidence to the contrary. The Census Bureau’s latest findings confirms earlier studies, finding that employers actually added 1.5 million workers to health insurance plans in 2012.

Romney Confirms He Will Deny Insurance To Millions With Pre-Existing Conditions If Obamacare Is Struck Down
By Igor Volsky

Mitt Romney confirmed on Tuesday that he would allow insurers to deny coverage to millions of Americans with pre-existing conditions if the Supreme Court strikes down Obamacare later this month. During a speech at Con-Air Industries in Orlando, Florida, the former Massachusetts governor said that Americans who have not been “continuously insured” would not be protected from discrimination if they suffer from pre-existing conditions:
ROMNEY: So let’s say someone has been continuously insured and they develop a serious condition. And let’s say they lose their jobs or they change jobs or they move and go to a different place, I don’t want them to be denied insurance because they have some pre-existing conditions. So we’re going to have to make sure that the law that we replace Obamacare with, ensures that people who have a pre-existing condition, who have been insured in the past, are able to get insurance in the future so they don’t have to worry about that condition keeping them from getting the kind of health care they deserve.
Watch it:

While the Affordable Care Act would prevent insurers from denying coverage to anyone with a pre-existing condition beginning in 2014, Romney’s provision is far more limited — and would only protect Americans who already have coverage.
As The New Republic’s Jonathan Cohn has pointed out, the federal government already forbids insurers from denying coverage to the continuously covered through the 1996 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). But the measure has been seen as a failure because “there is no limit on what insurers can charge under HIPAA” and the law does “little to regulate the content of coverage, leaving the door open to insurers to offer bare-bones policies. In addition, HIPAA notice requirements are weak, making it hard for people to know about this protection.”
Romney could offer to bolster the existing law, but given his general laissez-faire approach to health care and opposition to “government interference” in the private sector, it’s unlikely that he would want to impose new regulations on insurers. Without a mandate for everyone to purchase coverage, the protection would also attract sicker people who need care and increase premiums for all enrollees. In other words, it’s a poor solution that will leave millions still searching for coverage.

Pro-Choice Activists Could Still Repeal Michigan’s New ‘Rape Insurance’ Law
CREDIT: AP PHOTO/AL GOLDIS
Last week, the Michigan legislature approved a measure that prevents women from using their private insurance plans to cover abortion services, even in cases of rape and incest. The legislation, widely decried as a “rape insurance” bill, incited fierce debate. One Democratic lawmaker shared her personal story of sexual assault on the floor, pointing out that women shouldn’t be required to purchase a separate insurance rider in case they become pregnant from rape at some point in the future. Nonetheless, the bill passed along mostly party lines.
Since the legislation was “citizen-initiated” — the anti-choice community collected over 300,000 signatures to provoke a vote on the measure — it doesn’t need the governor’s signature, and will become law 90 days after lawmakers adjourn for the year. But reproductive rights activists still have options left. They could circulate a petition of their own to collect enough signatures for a public referendum, which would put the measure up for a statewide vote.
Pro-choice activists are already considering that type of ballot drive, according to the Associated Press. Democrats in the legislature are vowing to keep the pressure on this issue well into 2014. If they’re successful, the insurance restriction will come up for a popular vote around the same time as next November’s legislative elections.
In order to advance a referendum, Michigan state law requires activists to collect 161,305 signatures within 90 days of the legislature’s adjournment. That’s considerably fewer signatures than the anti-choice community needed to get this issue up for a vote. They were required to collect 258,088, a threshold which they ended up exceeding.
Women’s health groups say there’s plenty of evidence to suggest voters will reject the measure if it’s subject to a popular vote. According to Michigan’s chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), some of the lawmakers who voted for the bill represent districts where 60 to 70 percent of constituents are opposed to it. “They didn’t see this as an abortion issue,” ACLU lobbyist Shelli Weisberg explained to the AP. “They saw it as a coverage issue, as a privacy issue, as an issue that deals with commerce and not legislation. They didn’t want the Legislature trying to interfere with medical decisions.”
That’s the same reason that the state’s Republican governor, Rick Snyder, vetoed the measure last year. Snyder pointed out that the legislation went too far to interfere in the private insurance market.
Opponents are planning to gather on Monday morning to rally against the new law. “This is wrong. This is disgusting. We cannot let this prevail. Join us in the fight to repeal the Abortion Insurance Opt-Out Act,” the Facebook event reads.
Nonetheless, Michigan is hardly the only state with this type of restriction on the books. Barring insurance coverage for abortion services is a popular method of attacking reproductive rights. Eight other states — Idaho, Kansas, Kentucky, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Oklahoma, and Utah — also restrict abortion coverage in all private insurance plans offered in the state. And nearly two dozen states bar Obamacare’s new insurance marketplaces from including plans that cover abortion.

Anti-Obamacare Senators Can Afford To Pay More For Insurance, But Their Staff Isn’t So Lucky
Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-SC), a Republican who says humans are causing harmful climate change. CREDIT: AP
Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-SC) announced Monday that he will forgo his own federal employer subsidy, joining a group of at least a dozen Senators opting to pay the full cost of their own health insurance. But a ThinkProgress examination of the personal finances of Graham and others seeking to eliminate the subsidy for Congressional staffers finds that them in a much better financial position to do so than their Congressional staff.
Graham is one of seven Senate Republicans — all opponents of the Affordable Care Act — co-sponsoring Sen. David Vitter’s (R-LA) proposed “No Exemption for Washington from Obamacare Act.” The measure would require all members of Congress and staff to participate in state or federal health insurance exchanges and would eliminate the current employer contribution they receive from the federal government. By announcing that they will voluntarily turn down their own subsides even without the amendment, Graham and Sen. Mike Enzi (R-WY) are practicing what they preach — Vitter himself has apparently not yet done the same.
U.S. Senators currently receive an annual salary of $174,000. But their staff is paid considerably less. Graham’s systems administrator receives just $30,000 working in his Congressional office. One Enzi staff assistant makes $30,800 a year, and Vitter’s community liaison earns just over $39,000 annually.
Furthermore, the Center for Responsive Politics estimates that as of 2011, all three GOP lawmakers had considerable holdings that may contribute to their ability to cover the full cost of their insurance. Based on their mandatory personal financial disclosure forms, CRP determined:
Mike Enzi had a financial net worth between $322,062 and $1,535,000 .
Lindsey Graham had a financial net worth between $505,987 and $1,303,979.
David Vitter had a financial net worth between $801,061 and $2,479,000.
While Vitter has enlisted support for his proposal from “citizen co-sponsors” and Tea Party astroturf groups like FreedomWorks, one bipartisan group that is vocally unenthusiastic about the idea has been Congressional staffers. Democratic and Republican staffers alike have panned the proposal. Despite their personal wealth, none of the Vitter amendment supporters has yet volunteered to make up the cost difference for their staffers out of their own funds.


Stuntmen: Wrongful Deaths and Stunt Insurance
For any good action movie filmed in Utah or elsewhere, stunts are required to give the movie an edge. While stunts may seem over the top and ridiculous in certain situations, they certainly add a bit of thrill to the film.
There is more that goes into stunts than meets the eye. For starters, each of the stunt doubles must be insured. While normal film insurance covers the movie and a timetable of production, film production stunt insurance seeks to cover the risks assumed by stunt doubles. This does not mean that wrongful deaths do not happen, however.
For example, the family of a stuntman killed in a deadly blast during the filming of “The Expendables 2” filed a wrongful death suit against Millennium films in July 2012. Parents of Kun Liu, the stuntman that was killed in the blast, felt that the movie producers failed to ensure the safety of their stunt participants, making the company legally liable for the death of Liu. Sadly, wrongful deaths still happen even after taking adequate precautions.
Certainly the risks, both financial and human, of wrongful deaths can scare video production companies in Utah and elsewhere away from stunts.
If a video production company is already paying actors, it may seem counterintuitive to hire stunt doubles. The company would contract out the dangerous work and be forced to pay insurance premiums for their services. However, it becomes much more obvious to pay for stunts after taking into account the prospect of a famous actor or actress injuring themselves during filming. The costs of an injured star would gobble up millions of dollars fairly quickly; taking into account the amount of time and money lost to prolong filming indefinitely until the star heals.
While some see insurance as a necessary to assume the liability of stunt performers, famous actors like Jackie Chan see the insurance industry putting filmmakers in a creative bind.
“There are too many safety and insurance rules to follow,” said the martial-arts aficionado and action star. “I know they want to make sure that I’m safe when I do my stunts, but sometimes they insist that I use protective gear for even simple things.”
Movies like “The Lone Ranger” and “Breakdown” — two movies filmed in Utah — would lack the thrill without stunts. However, as movie producers continue to rein in budgets, the idea of paying out for wrongful deaths will make sure that stunts are reined in as well.
Taylor Larsen is a legal writer. Information provided by Robert J. Debry. He writes for Fusion 360, and advertising agency in Utah

@AccentureTech: “#IoT is expanding insurance offerings beyond indemnification to real-time risk protection:”

Accenture’s global study reveals a continued push toward digital insurance distribution read more

@Timothy_Hughes: “3 ways insurance will be disrupted by the Internet of Things @Which50 #IOT #IOE #Fintech”

Digital Intelligence read more

Business Development Insurance

I’ve talked to agency owners and new business directors about their approach to growing and as you can imagine there are as many opinions as there are agencies. What everyone does agree on is that new business is the priority. After all, winning new business is the future of every agency. So why is it so frustrating? There are so many complicating factors that play into the client-agency mating game. A little business development insurance can help.
In theory, getting a new client shouldn’t be so tough. Not so fast. LinkedIn has a little over 1 million marketers, and the government counts over 30 thousand advertising-like firms in the U.S.. That is a lot of competition for new business. If you were a brand marketer, how would you sort out the differences among the hundreds or thousands of agencies knocking on your door? How would you distinguish between all those who claim the same things; innovation, creativity, great results, cool processes, big data expertise, and the list goes on. Most marketers say they all look and sound the same.
The struggle to differentiate is one of the fundamental challenges for agencies and the reason there are many resources to turn to. The challenge is further complicated by the way marketers choose their agency partners including how they go to market, what services they need, what experience they value, size, geography, resources, culture and many more. There are also many tools to help find and engage prospects like databases, social networks, CRM programs, daily leads, and so on. All of these options can be useful. However, the result of any of these approaches will be greatly improved by doing a few key things first. That is why I call it business development insurance.
Marketers have their 4Ps, a term popularized by Neil Borden and E. Jerome McCarthy, the ingredients to define and promote a brand or product’s unique selling proposition, what differentiates it from competitors, to help figure out how to be successful in the marketplace. I have a similar approach for agencies called the 3Ps. To be honest, there are a variety of “3P” theories and applications just like there are many “4Ps”, 7Ps and so on. The 3P approach is really nothing more than basic marketing and may seem a bit too obvious. In fact, it is what clients often rely on their agency to help them with yet somehow overlooked or short-changed when it comes to the agency’s own success. The cobbler’s shoes syndrome has never been so true.
• Product — What do you sell including primary service offerings, category experience, leadership experience, case studies, expertise, culture, style, partnerships, etc.
• Prospect — Who will buy what your distinctive product by industry, geography, sales, sophistication, personality, past agency experience, business goals, service needs, etc.
• Plan — How do you find and reach them with inbound, outbound, PR, networking, speaking, publishing, blogging, etc.
Business development insurance is a three-step process where each step builds on and informs the next.
What is your Product? Agency owners can quickly tell you what they offer — full service, digital forward, media agnostic, and so on. Many will have a more refined description including things like passion and culture, client service, and ROI. These are all important attributes of your product however they aren’t differentiating and may not properly align with what your customer is buying. It is critical to understand what YOUR market is seeking and shape your offering around it otherwise you won’t stand out and will be less likely to get into the conversation at all. Remember almost 100% of clients check you out before you even know that they are looking. What is it the client is looking for and how does that align with what you say you offer? How do you shape and sharpen what you sell so you can be in the right pitches, up your win rate and grow more effectively? How many times have you cringed when your client says, I already know who my customer is and what they want. I don’t need to do any research or ask them. The Agency Management Institute, RSW/US, and others, do annual research among marketing executives to help agencies better understand what markets truly want. Have you seen this year’s report?
Who is your Prospect? Once you know what you are selling, your product, it will become easier to define who will buy it. Are you that bad client too? How do you know which prospects are buying today compared to two years ago? Agencies who reduce the number of industries they go after or limit their geography can better focus their time and effort on the most viable opportunities. Also, personality plays a big role. Is that marketer ego driven and likely to only work with the top agency or a big agency brand? And culture is another important consideration. Does their work style align with yours? Do they treat agencies like partners or vendors? An objective, honest, brutal look at these and many other dimensions will help you sharpen your efforts and improve your results. Sometimes it is hard for agency owners to be brutally objective. Agency consultants or other resources can provide an outside perspective to help you decide.
What is your Plan? Once you’ve shaped and sharpen your services, and you know who is most likely to buy what you offer, and you’ve identified the verticals, geography and people who should be your next great clients, it’s time to ramp up the business development program. There are three areas where agency growth typically comes from, traditional prospecting, organic growth and leadership networking. You need a smart plan for all three to maximize the most revenue potential. Too often agencies go all in on a prospecting plan and neglect the other two rich sources of new clients. I’ll go into greater detail about each of these areas in a future post because each is as important as the other. In fact, each of these three areas account for a third of new clients and new revenue. Not paying attention to any could be costing you. You can also read more about it on my website www.jheenan.com.
Agency leaders tell me they know these things intuitively or have learned these concepts at a seminar or other places. They also lament about the time and effort it takes to implement. If you take to heart what Adobe found, 76% of marketers believe marketing has changed more in the last two years than in the past 50, you should think differently. Is your agency keeping up or do you look like you are stuck somewhere in the last 50 years? Spending quality time up front on the 3Ps, Product, Prospects and Plan, is like buying insurance for better results in the third. Regularly reviewing the always-evolving marketplace and how it aligns with what your agency offers will keep you growing. Lets Grow!
- See more at: http://www.jheenan.com/

Health Insurance and Death
By Matthew Yglesias

Cato’s Michael Cannon has a post up which, unlike Charles Lane’s writings on the matter, actually attempts to engage on the merits with the argument that lack of health insurance leads to people dying. But even though he cites a number of studies on the subject, only one, the Richard Kronick study, actually address the point the Institute of Medicine study was referring to. Kronick concludes that the approximately 20,000 deaths per year is an overestimate due to a failure to control for relevant demographic variables. Conversely, Andrew P. Wilper, Steffie Woolhandler, Karen E. Lasser, Danny McCormick, David H. Bor, and David U. Himmelstein found in their “Health Insurance and Mortality in US Adults” that the IOM study is a serious underestimation:
The study, which analyzed data from national surveys carried out by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), assessed death rates after taking education, income and many other factors including smoking, drinking and obesity into account. It estimated that lack of health insurance causes 44,789 excess deaths annually.
Previous estimates from the IOM and others had put that figure near 18,000. The methods used in the current study were similar to those employed by the IOM in 2002, which in turn were based on a pioneering 1993 study of health insurance and mortality.
A separate study indicated that individuals lacking health insurance were more likely to die even in the context of emergency room visits:
The researchers took into account the severity of the injuries and the patients’ race, gender and age. After those adjustments, they still found the uninsured were 80 percent more likely to die than those with insurance — even low-income patients insured by the government’s Medicaid program.
“I’m really surprised,” said Dr. Eric Lavonas of the American College of Emergency Physicians and a doctor at Denver Health Medical Center. “It’s well known that people without health insurance don’t get the same quality of health care in this country, but I would have thought that this group of patients would be the least vulnerable.”
If “no health insurance means bad health care” or “bad health care can lead to death” were some kind of wildly counterintuitive propositions at odds with sound theory, then I think we might have good reason to doubt these results. But in fact they’re perfectly intuitive results that accord perfectly with, among other things, the elementary economic theory that says people wouldn’t pay for health insurance unless it provided something of value. The bulk of empirical studies also seem to confirm this. Lack of insurance is associated with low-quality health care which is associated with enhanced risk of death.

What Widows Should Do With Life Insurance Money

If you’re a recent widow, you have had to deal with an enormous amount of challenges:
The emotions. The conversations. The decisions.
But with time, the grief begins to loosen its grip on you, and you need to consider moving ahead in your new life for your own happiness. In the meantime, you must make many financial decisions, including what to do with life insurance benefits.
Assess your finances
Depending on the size of the life insurance policy payout, your options and alternatives could be few or many.
Let’s assume you’ll receive $250,000 tax-free cash from a life insurance policy your husband had established for your care after his passing. How do you handle this financial issue?
First step: Understand your financial situation. What assets and liabilities do you have? Maybe you own a home, have some savings and investments, two cars, and some miscellaneous personal property.
But what do you owe?
This is often the best place to start when evaluating your options for a life insurance check.
Let’s say you owe $150,000 on your home mortgage. It may make sense to take $150,000 of your $250,000 life insurance check and pay off the mortgage.
While that takes away 60% of your available cash from life insurance, it also eliminates your mortgage and any associated mortgage payment, freeing your monthly cash flow and potentially saving you tens or hundreds of thousands of dollars on mortgage interest.
Also, there is a non-financial benefit to reducing or eliminating debt. Many clients tell me they feel peace of mind knowing their home is paid off and the fact that they don’t owe anyone anything.
It doesn’t always make sense to pay off debt.
What if you want to pay off your mortgage or other debt, but your total debt is equal to or greater than the amount of the life insurance check?
Then you need to consider your how easily you can access your other investments and savings.
It doesn’t make sense to spend all of your life insurance cash to reduce your debt when you have little other liquid savings. If you pay off your debt but have to use credit cards to get through the next few months, you’ve actually done more harm than good.
For example: If you pay off a mortgage at, let’s say, 5% interest, but then have to turn around and use a credit card at 14% interest, you’ve exchanged secured, low cost debt for unsecured, higher cost debt.
Instead, if your total debt meets or exceeds the amount of cash you’ve received from life insurance, don’t rush to pay all your debt off. Instead, start with your debt with the highest interest rate, and hold onto some cash for living expenses and other needs going forward. This insurance then servers as an important emergency fund.
Other considerations
After you’ve addressed debt, consider other uses for this cash.
Many women I work with want to remodel their homes. Some women want to downsize to a smaller home. Others want to move to another area or even another state to be closer to children and grandchildren.
There’s nothing wrong with these choices, as long as you don’t outspend your budget. Seek the advice of a realtor familiar with homes in your area so you don’t go overboard with home improvements that may be too far out of line with other similarly priced homes in your area. Otherwise, you could have a hard time getting a return on your remodel investment if you sell your home in the future.
Other potential uses for the life insurance check could include long-term care insurance, gifting to family or organizations, or setting funds aside for future travel.
There is no right or wrong when it comes to how you spend money from a life insurance policy. But every widow would benefit from making these decisions in the context of a personalized, comprehensive financial plan.
Once you’ve explored, goals, values and priorities, you can begin to understand the trade offs between decisions you may be considering and make more informed choices that will work for your finances and your lifestyle.
The article What Widows Should Do With Life Insurance Money appeared first on Wealthy Single Mommy.

PolicyGenius is Transforming the Trillion-Dollar Insurance Industry for Americans
At Revolution, we partner with companies disrupting legacy industries to provide better alternatives to consumers. We particularly like the intersection of stodgy businesses and talented entrepreneurs with inventive ways of improving those businesses. And it’s hard to imagine a stodgier business than the insurance industry.
We are thrilled to announce the newest addition to our portfolio: PolicyGenius, a direct-to-consumer insurance platform. It is our biggest initial investment to date and we’re excited to be leading the company’s Series B round.
The vision for PolicyGenius and sheer size of the market it is attacking made it a particularly compelling opportunity and one that aligns with our focus at Revolution.
Just think about the market — the U.S. is the world’s largest insurance market with over $1 trillion in net premiums written annually, yet it’s old and inefficient. The average age of an insurance agent is 59 (most of whom will be retiring in the coming years), there are over 18 million “stuck shoppers” in life insurance alone (people who want to purchase but have been derailed in the shopping process), and there is an average of three duplicate processes per customer sale. We see a huge opportunity to bring this largely offline, arduous process online with smart analysis, purchase support, and policy management.
PolicyGenius has built an informative and intuitive platform, providing best-in-class educational content, powerful quoting engines, streamlined application tools, and policy management dashboards to help consumers find and purchase the coverage they need,. In doing so, PolicyGenius brings the difficult insurance process online and takes the pain millions of Americans face out of the insurance discovery and purchase process. And it’s really constructive: answering a few questions on the website’s “Insurance Check-Up” helps an individual figure out what kind of coverage is needed and, importantly, what is not needed. Today, the company can guide a shopper through the complexities and nuances of life, long-term disability, renters, and pet insurance, with more categories on the way.
The company was founded by Jennifer Fitzgerald and Francois de Lame, two former McKinsey consultants who saw the issues the insurance industry is plagued with first-hand after years of working in the firm’s insurance practice. As they struggled to buy their own insurance policies outside of the office, they knew it was time to start PolicyGenius. The two have since merged their deep industry knowledge with smart technology to build a company that solves many of the problems insurance faces today, but also aligns with a complicated regulatory landscape and legacy industry structure.
And they’ve proven the model works. The economics of insurance are tied to multiple layers of middlemen, who eat up margin, but also create an opportunity to grow a sustainable business by disrupting those layers with online channels. Over a short period of time, the company has advised and insured users from every type of demographic segment and increased its user base by over 30% each month.
We led the $15 million Series B financing with the participation of investors from previous rounds, including Karlin Ventures, Susa Ventures, and strategic backers AXA Strategic Ventures, MassMutual, and Transamerica Ventures. PolicyGenius will use the proceeds to expand the company’s product lines and accelerate growth — and we couldn’t be more excited to partner with them to do so.


ObamaCare Increases the Salience of Antitrust in Health Insurance Markets from “Important” to “Essential”
As the extremely-sharp Aaron Edlin has taught me, apropos of the current wave of proposed health insurance mergers — Aetna-Humana, Anthem-Cigna, and Centene-HealthNet: The coming of ObamaCare makes any willingness on the part of antitrust authority to allow these mergers to go through extremely dangerous and destructive policy indeed. The imposition of the individual mandate to purchase health insurance makes maintaining competition in health insurance markets significantly more important. Usually, the exercise of market power and the ability to easily collude implicitly or explicitly made possible by large market shares are curved by the possibility of exit. The “exit the market and buy something else” option for consumers is the one competitor that the firm cannot acquire and merge with. It is the one competitor with which the firm cannot collude, implicitly or explicitly. Imposing an individual mandate to purchase is a wise policy in a market place where the major market failure is adverse selection. It threatens to be a catastrophic policy in the marketplace where the major market failure is the exercise of sellers market power.
Originally published on bradford-delong.com

Read This Before You Freak Out About The 500,000 People Whose Insurance Policies Got Canceled
CREDIT: SHUTTERSTOCK
By Sy Mukherjee
On Monday, Kaiser Health News reported that health insurers are sending thousands of cancellation notices to consumers who buy coverage through the individual market because of requirements imposed by Obamacare. While Affordable Care Act critics are certain to use the news as proof that the health law is unworkable, the reality is that the Americans who own these skimpy health policies will get far more robust plans through Obamacare’s marketplaces — and most will qualify for government assistance to pay for that insurance.
Many policies currently sold through the individual market do little to help people who actually get sick. These plans come with appealingly low monthly premiums to draw in consumers. But those supposedly “affordable” rates typically mask high deductibles, big gaps in coverage, and large co-pays for essential care like prescription drug services that consumers tend not to realize until they actually need to use their coverage. And if you have a pre-existing medical condition or get sick, your rates go up — if you’re even able to buy a plan in the first place.
Insurance companies have been able to get away with this because they were largely unregulated before the health reform law’s passage. Now, Obamacare is changing that.
Under the health reform law, insurers can’t discriminate against people with pre-existing conditions, or set lifetime or annual caps on people’s health services. And insurance plans must offer a broad range of ten “essential health benefits” including maternity care, prescription drug coverage, and mental health services. That explains why major individual policy sellers such as Florida Blue and Kaiser Permanente in California are discontinuing large swaths of their current health plans — they simply don’t offer a minimally acceptable level of health coverage.
Some have raised concerns that the new insurance plans that meet Obamacare’s minimum coverage threshold will be more expensive than previously-available policies, since they have to offer more robust benefits. But independent analyses of the ACA’s effect on the individual market have found that nearly half of Americans who currently have individual health plans will get government subsidies averaging $2,672 of a consumer’s annual premium:
CREDIT: Kaiser Family Foundation
And that’s just the estimate across all individuals, irrespective of whether or not they qualify for government subsidies. Obamacare grants more generous subsidies to Americans who make less money, and among subsidy-eligible individuals, the tax credit will be closer to $5,548 per year.
Depending on the level of coverage that consumers choose, new health plans will cover anywhere from 60 percent to 90 percent of individuals’ medical costs. For instance, healthier Americans who might want a bare-bones “Bronze” plan would receive subsidies that pay for 77 percent of their premiums. Younger people who want even cheaper plans that provide less benefits can always turn to a “catastrophic” insurance plan that only pays out in the case of a major illness or accident that can cost hundreds of thousands of dollars in medical expenses.

When Do1Thing Is, Ugh, Health Insurance Related

Thursday is a great day to do that 1 thing you don’t want to do but also don’t want to continue thinking about doing.
It’s not only Thursday, it’s the first of October, which means today my spouse Ben at last officially becomes a full-time employee at his place of business. As you may recall, I walked away from full-time employment about two years ago, never realizing that I would inspire Ben, a year later, to do the same. We’ve been DWYL-ing ever since, paying for Obamacare, and filing quarterly taxes, and trying not to fret about having to dip into savings to cover unexpected bills.
Ben managed to find work in his new field of choice quickly, though he had no prior training in it, and I’m so proud of him for proving himself to his employers and becoming increasingly valuable to them. Now, after a year of PT / hourly labor, they’ve brought him on. Now he gets benefits. For the first time in just over a year, one of us will have paid sick days again! Vacation! Health insurance!
Only one of us, though. For now, I’m sticking with my Obamacare Oscar plan, because the cost of my joining him through his company plan was exorbitant, the deductible ridiculous, and the coverage no better than what I currently enjoy. My 1 thing, then, is to call Oscar and figure this all out. What will it mean for my own coverage? What it will cost? Let’s see.
What’s your 1 thing?


http://twitter.com/GiulioCoraggio/status/763525390237401090 #IoT: #Insurance of Things? https://t.co/aHq29kvGM8

Senator Will File A Lawsuit Forcing His Staff To Pay More For Health Insurance

By Igor Volsky
The LA Times’ Mike Memoli reports that Sen. Ron Johnson (R-WI) will file a lawsuit to prevent Congressional staffers and lawmakers from receiving subsidies when they purchase coverage in the Affordable Care Act’s exchanges, substantially increasing their health care costs.
Under current law, lawmakers and some of their aides will be required to drop their existing health care coverage in the tax-subsidized Federal Health Benefits Program (FEHB) and enroll in the insurance exchanges at the core of the health law beginning on Oct 1. Though Sen. Chuck Grassley (R-IA) — the author of the amendment responsible for the shift — had initially stipulated that Congressional employees “use their existing employer contribution” to buy insurance, the final law did not specifically mention the role of the employer, leaving regulators concerned that the language could prohibit the government from contributing to the insurance costs of Congressional employees and leave poorly-paid aides responsible for the full cost of coverage.
In August, after the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) ruled that the Congress can apply their employer contributions towards their exchange plans, Republicans pledged to forfeit the contribution and fight to undo “special exemption.” Sen. David Vitter (R-LA) introduced legislation to require Congressional and executive branch employees to sign up for Obamacare without the employer contribution and Republicans considered including the provision in legislation to re-open the federal government.
But Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-NV) and the Democrats (and Congressional staffers), strongly opposed the change and it was eventually dropped. “Okay. Go after members of Congress. But even doing that. Now, I can handle if I have to buy insurance without employer contribution. But some of my senators can’t,” Reid told the Huffington Post shortly after the shutdown ended. “Forget about that. Forget about senators. They can do okay. But staff — we have staff people of [Sen.] Susan Collins. She has people who work in Maine and make $25,000 a year. One of the reasons you can get somebody like that is that you give them health care. … How in good conscience could you do something like that?”
While the federal government will be the only big employer to subsidize coverage in the exchanges for several years, other large businesses could begin contributing to employee health care through the marketplaces in 2017. On average, the government pays approximately 75 percent of enrollees’ health care costs.

Purchasing Business Insurance for Startups
Buying insurance can be a daunting task, particularly for venture-backed startups.
The market for relevant insurance products tends to be fragmented and a finding a broker that understands tech can be tough. Sometimes, just getting the ball rolling can be confusing!
With that in mind, here’s an introduction to purchasing insurance…
What to do:
Vet Your Broker
While there are some generalists out there, most brokers earn their success by mastering an industry. Make sure that your broker fully understands your business model and where the inherent risks to your company lie. A good broker will look at your company from all angles and leave no stone unturned. How do you make this choice? Same as any business partner, vendor, or service provider.
Ask your investors and fellow founders for their opinions and recommendations. Do your research on potential broker-partners and get a feel for their philosophy and approach. Engage in a dialogue with your broker to verify what your research. Check in with current clients (if possible) to see how their experience has been with the brokerage. Make sure you understand the application process and you’re on board with the broker’s methods.
Ask Questions
Make sure you feel good about this partnership because having to explain and re-explain your business to every broker you work with just causes more headaches as the company grows. You want your broker to have your back and be excited about your business and its roadmap.
Once you’ve found your insurance broker, don’t hesitate to dig into the coverage and ask questions. Insurance should be viewed as an investment rather than just another cost and your broker should know this. Make sure that you’re making the right investment. You want the proper coverage for your risk profile, flexibility to modify coverage as your company changes, and scalability to layer on coverage as your company grows.
What not to do:
Go to Multiple Brokers (at first…)
The usual “shopping around” method doesn’t really work in your favor when buying your business insurance. Here’s why:
When a broker approaches an insurance company on your behalf, they become the exclusive “broker of record” that can work with carrier. Only one broker can talk to any one carrier at any given time. This gives the broker the best chance to make his/her case on your behalf without any distractions.
When you approach multiple brokers at the same time, they’ll almost certainly go to the same markets (those that are best for your specific company) if they’re doing it right. Depending on the order in which you approached each broker, each will be blocked at certain markets because another has already approached them. The process is now jammed up and you’re pushed into choosing the preferred broker as you should have done in the first place.
Withhold Information
Underwriters require quite a bit of information to create a coverage proposal. They’re essentially extending you a multimillion dollar line of credit for when things go wrong. This is particularly true for policies vital to venture-backed companies, such as technology errors or omissions insurance, cyber liability insurance, or directors and officers insurance.
You’ll need to submit things like financial statements, sample customer contracts, written HR practices, and investor decks. Information is king; you want to give your broker as much ammunition as possible to argue in your favor with the underwriters regarding your risk profile and annual premiums. Proceeding with weak/incomplete information will lead to additional underwriter requests anyway.
To avoid headaches, the goal is to try to answer all underwriter questions in one shot to cut down the overall time it takes to get a formal proposal.
Hopefully these pointers will help make your insurance purchasing process as stress-free as possible!
About the author
Carl Niedbala is the COO of Founder Shield, a boutique commercial insurance brokerage that takes the stress out of getting insurance for venture-backed companies.

South Carolina Bill Forces Unemployed Workers To Volunteer In Order To Receive Unemployment Insurance
By Tanya Somanader

As the struggling economy forces more Americans to rely on social aid programs, more and more Republicans are ratcheting up the attacks on those in need. When it comes to unemployment insurance, the party’s presidential candidates, governors, and lawmakers are searching out ways to not only gut the program but belittle vulnerable Americans in the process.
In South Carolina, where unemployment is at nearly 10 percent, state Sen. Paul Campbell (R) introduced a bill forcing unemployed workers that can’t find a job in six months to volunteer for 16 hours a week in order to continue getting benefits because “it’s easier for people to get a job if they have a job of some sort”:
If unemployed workers in South Carolina can’t find a job in six months, they would have to volunteer 16 hours weekly to continue getting benefits from the state under a bill up for debate today by a Senate panel.
Its sponsor, Sen. Paul Campbell, said it’s easier for people to get a job if they have a job of some sort, and his intent is to match people’s skills with work that needs done in city or county governments and schools, from electrical work to assisting in classrooms.
“I just think if someone’s busy working, they’ll be more industrious and more likely to get a job,” said Campbell, R-Goose Creek. “Depending on the skill they’ve got, I think we can put that skill to work. I’m not talking about collecting garbage on the side of the highway.”
Campbell, a chemical engineer, says the unemployed would still have time to search for a paying job, while honing their skills.
In reality, people who receive unemployment insurance actually work harder to find jobs than those who don’t qualify for the program. But for the last 34 months, there have been more than four unemployed job seekers for every job opening. Forcing these workers to volunteer not only takes away from much-needed time to job search but also reinforces negative stereotypes of unemployed workers’ laziness.
Like many other states, South Carolina is pairing this bill with another likely unconstitutional bill that mandates laid-off workers pass a drug test to qualify for their benefits. That bill’s sponsor state Sen. Kevin Bryant (R) argued that because “those working to keep their jobs are susceptible to a possible drug test,” those that are unemployed should be too. “Hopefully, folks would make the better decision to not use drugs, and we can get them back to work,” he said.
But as the National Employment Law Project pointed out, judging unemployed workers as lazy drug users severely mischaracterizes and marginalizes a large group of Americans: “The unemployed are just a slice of America. They’re you and I without a job…To suggest that the unemployed are lazy drug abusers who are just sitting around feeds a false, ugly stereotype.”

Insurance Technology Funding by Type — Q4 2016
The following two graphs summarize the types of funding going into the Insurance Technology space. Please note these graphics are made using 2016 data through October.

The graph above shows the total amount of VC funding broken out by type. In recent years, we’ve seen a large increase in the amount of Series A and Series C funding events. The amount of Series B and Series D funding events have seen some growth as well.

The graph above shows the total count of funding events broken out by type. We’ve seen a general upward trend over the past few years. Earlier stage deals (Seed, Series A, Series B) have seen the largest growth in the number of funding events.
We are currently tracking 1020 Insurance Technology companies in 14 categories across 54 countries, with a total of $17B in funding. Click here to learn more about the full Insurance Technology landscape report and database.

The Next Battleground For Reproductive Rights: Maintaining Insurance Coverage For Abortion
As the anti-choice community attempts a wide range of strategies to limit women’s access to abortion, one of its most successful tactics involves imposing indirect barriers to the procedure. If states simply make it too hard for women to get an abortion — whether that’s because there aren’t any nearby clinics, or because the procedure is too expensive, or because it’s too difficult to wade through all the red tape — then it won’t be necessary to enact an actual ban that directly challenges Roe v. Wade.
Abortion opponents have been extremely successful at this incremental strategy, particularly because some of these abortion restrictions don’t appear to pose a threat on the surface. For instance, the harsh regulations on abortion providers that are forcing clinics across the country to close their doors don’t immediately appear to be unreasonable, since they’re couched in terms of patient safety. And one of the next big fights over reproductive rights, insurance coverage for abortion, is similarly deceptive.
It’s perhaps understandable, considering the fact that the insurance industry confuses most Americans. Many people may not pay attention to the services that are covered in their plan, or understand why that has anything to do with abortion rights. But this has actually become a hugely important battleground for reproductive justice.
Thanks to the federal Hyde Amendment, the policy that prevents low-income women from using their Medicaid coverage to help pay for the cost of an abortion, insurance coverage for abortion has been an issue for decades. Since poorer women already struggle to afford abortion, the Hyde Amendment is a particularly insidious method of cutting off millions of women’s access to health care. And over the past several years, the issue has spread beyond Medicaid. The federal health law actually provided an opening for abortion opponents to impose further restrictions on abortion coverage in the new state-level marketplaces. Some states have gone a step further and enacted sweeping restrictions in the private market.
Now, according to a new report from the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF), 34 states have some kind of limit on which insurance plans are allowed to cover abortion care:
CREDIT: Kaiser Familly Foundation
Anti-Obamacare politicians sometimes claim that the health law represents an expansion of abortion coverage. That couldn’t be further from the truth. In fact, the health law maintains the artificial divide between abortion care and the rest of women’s reproductive health services. By KFF’s estimations, about half of the U.S. women of reproductive age who are gaining insurance under Obamacare won’t have access to abortion coverage for elective procedures.
“These coverage limitations are occurring at a time when many states are taking other actions to curtail access to abortion through multiple fronts,” KFF’s report notes, explaining that the combination of these anti-choice policies “will have the expected result of limiting access to and the availability of abortion services in some states.”
Maureen Shaw, the editor-in-chief of the women’s rights and issues site sherights.com, echoed that sentiment. “These coverage limitations, especially when combined with the current political maelstrom against abortion rights, are very dangerous. Poor and low-income women will shoulder the brunt of these restrictions and their health will suffer,” Shaw told ThinkProgress. “By targeting abortion care, politicians are sending a clear message that women do not deserve comprehensive health coverage.”
Nonetheless, anti-choice lawmakers aren’t satisfied. Congressional Republicans continue to push for even more restrictions on insurance coverage for abortion. Last week, a House Judiciary Committee advanced HR 7, a sweeping measure that ultimately threatens to discourage abortion coverage in both the private and public insurance markets. That measure would dramatically reshape KFF’s map by outlawing abortion coverage in every single state’s insurance marketplace.
“The status quo is that abortion has been regularly covered — not called out, not controversial — as part of general medical coverage in private health insurance,” Susan Wood, an associate professor of health policy at George Washington University and one of the individuals who testified against the proposed legislation, told ThinkProgress in an earlier interview. “HR 7 could really change the nature of the insurance market such that ultimately it becomes the norm not to cover abortion.”
According to the Guttmacher Institute, the varying restrictions on abortion coverage have created a confusing environment, and many women who have insurance simply assume that their plan must not cover abortion. If abortion opponents have their way, that assumption will eventually become a reality.

Insurance Companies Are Optimistic About Obamacare: ‘We’re All-In, And We’re Happy We Are’
CREDIT: AP PHOTO/JON ELSWICK
By Sy Mukherjee
Obamacare opponents have made some pretty bold claims about the negative effect the Affordable Care Act will have on America’s health industry.
Medicare will “essentially collapse,” warned former GOP presidential candidate Rep. Michele Bachmann (R-MN) in 2011. “There will be no insurance industry left in three years,” predicted Sen. Tom Coburn (R-OK) during a 2010 town hall.
 
But actual insurance industry leaders have been singing a very different tune at the JP Morgan health care conference currently taking place in San Francisco. Many insurance executives are predicting that the Obamacare marketplaces will be a robust and growing segment of the U.S. health care industry despite Healthcare.gov’s botched rollout, and saying that the age and health demographics of those who have already enrolled in new ACA plans are on track with their expectations.
“Despite the near-term uncertainty, we believe exchanges will be growing as a big part of the market over time,” WellPoint Inc. CEO Joseph Swedish told conference attendees on Tuesday. “We are more focused on the end game of exchanges than the twists and turns in the near term.”
Swedish also believes that enrollment will continue to surge over the next three months. “We saw a sizable uptick at the end of December, concurrent with the first enrollment deadline, and we expect a similar bump in March, in front of the second primary enrollment deadline.” The Obama administration recently reported that about 2.2 million Americans have enrolled in plans through state and federal Obamacare marketplaces.
Insurer Health Net is particularly pleased by West Coast enrollment in the marketplaces, according to Modern Healthcare. “I think we now feel we’re all-in, and we’re happy we are,” said Health Net President and CEO Jay Gellert. “We believe that this population will continue to grow. It’s working in California, and it’s working in the West, and I think it will be an example for the rest of the country.”
The Washington Post’s Sarah Kliff, who has been tweeting live from the JP Morgan conference, noted that even insurers who expect to lose money in Obamacare’s first year are confident the marketplaces will lure more and more consumers, and become more profitable, down the line. “It’s still the early innings,” said Cigna CEO David Cordani.
Insurance company leaders are also brushing aside concerns that not enough young and healthy people have been enrolling in marketplace plans.
Many insurers actually set their 2014 Obamacare rates under the assumption that a disproportionate number of older, sicker, and medically costly people would flock to the marketplaces in the law’s nascent years. Enrollment data released on Monday tentatively confirmed those suspicions. About one in four adults who signed up for plans were aged 19 to 34 — and therefore, the assumption goes, more likely to be healthy and less expensive to cover — while approximately 33 percent were 55 or older (although there are indications that youth enrollment is accelerating at a faster pace than general enrollment).
That mix “is not out of whack with our expectations,” said Wellpoint Inc. CFO Wayne DeVeydt on Tuesday. Aetna CEO Mark Bertolini went one step further when addressing the demographics on Wednesday. “I’m not alarmed,” he said. “They’re better than I thought they would have been.”

Federal Employees’ Insurance Will No Longer Be Required To Exclude Transgender Coverage
Katherine Archuleta, Director of the Office of Personnel Management CREDIT: AP PHOTO/CAROLYN KASTER
By Andrew Cray
The U.S. Office of Personnel Management issued guidance Friday stating that the agency is removing the requirement that insurance carriers offering health insurance to federal employees through the Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) Program exclude coverage for care related to gender transition for the 2015 plan year. Though the new policy allows insurance companies to drop the exclusion, they are not required to do so.
In the letter to FEHB insurers, OPM acknowledges the “evolving professional consensus that treatment is considered medically necessary” for many transgender people. This statement is consistent with decades of research and practice demonstrating that access to transition-related care significantly improves the health of transgender people and that exclusions blocking coverage put patients’ lives at risk and undermine the ability of medical professionals to appropriately care for their patients.
OPM’s decision places the federal government among the growing list of employers across the country who are dismantling discrimination against transgender employees by treating their health care needs the same as other types of care. In 2013, the Corporate Equality Index, compiled by the Human Rights Campaign, found that more than a quarter of Fortune 500 companies now offer coverage that is fully inclusive of transgender health needs to their employees. The country’s second-largest purchaser of health insurance, the California Public Employees’ Retirement System (CalPERS), removed exclusions for transition-related care in 2013 and other state and municipal governments have also taken steps to increase access to care for their transgender employees.
Removing barriers to coverage has become a proven good employment practice, and enables transgender employees to live healthy, authentic lives.

CNN’s Castellanos Problem: On-Air Contributor Revealed To Be Paid By GOP, Insurance Industry
By Lee Fang

The Plum Line’s Greg Sargent has confirmed that CNN contributor Alex Castellanos’ political consulting firm, National Media, is the ad buyer for the insurance industry group America’s Health Insurance Plan’s (AHIP) new ad blitz attacking Democratic health reform plans.
Not only does he fashion himself as the “father of the modern attack ad,” but Castellanos is also the father of the Republican approach to health reform. In July, Castellanos wrote a memo for the GOP leadership on how to kill health reform. The memo emphasized the use of buzzwords to characterize Democratic plans — like “risky” and “experiment” — but most importantly defined the ultimate goal: “If we slow this sausage-making process down, we can defeat it.” Additionally, according to the FEC website, the Republican Party has been paying Castellanos’ firm for media work. Starting on July 23rd, Castellanos received four payments totaling $434,336 from the Republican National Committee.
Since Castellanos is being paid by both the private health insurance industry and the Republican Party, why has the network given him a platform to attack President Obama’s plans to overhaul the healthcare system? Here’s a look at some recent comments made by Castellanos about health reform while appearing on CNN:
CASTELLANOS: The Republicans actually have a very different approach than the Democrats do, but it’s very concrete. Instead of a big gamble, this one [… ] I believe the insurance industry supports that. Obama and Republican — President Obama put that on the table. If he put tort reform, if he put portability, if he put shopping across state lines, he could put together a package right now and Republicans would stand with him 100 percent. [CNN, 9/30/09]
CASTELLANOS: Democrats are not signing on to this huge, expensive trillion-dollar experiment. […] That, one, this is a huge experiment with health care. You know, President Obama has spent really, his family, more time picking the family dog than they have crafting this health care plan that’s going to transform 20 percent of the — of our economy and your health care forever. [CNN, 7/22/09]
CASTELLANOS: The more people learn about [Obama’s] health care plan, the less they seem to like it. [CNN, 7/23/09]
A network spokeswoman has confirmed that CNN will soon clarify the conflict of interest Castellanos has in regards to AHIP. However, CNN should note that he has been paid by the RNC, and if he is to continue opining on the health debate, disclosure should be made during every segment in which he appears. Indeed, the policy of full disclosure should extend to other CNN pundits, including Frank Donatelli, a GOP lobbyist who represents Blue Cross Blue Shield.

Career Insurance — Multiple Income Sources
With the changing marketplace that seems to move in multiple directions by the minute in our 24/7 consumer driven marketplace, considering career insurance just like any other insurance should be part of your life risk management plan. Career insurance comes down to having a contingency plan and specific additional income stream(s), (3–6 months of emergency cash on hand as well) to protect in the event of a loss of employment. Don’t get caught in a panic state, in the event of a job loss. Consider the pros and cons of a side business that “ you own”, compared to your employer owning you. Jack Welch’s famous quote states it perfectly, “Control Your Own Destiny or Someone Else Will”.
Side gig — If you are an employee and not an owner of a business — consider the negative ramifications of losing your job. The typical scenario by so many is to start sending Linked In resumes and online resumes all over the place. This never leads to long-term success because there are so many individuals doing the same thing. There are so many opportunities today to incorporate a small side business related to personal passions to generate income. With the use of the Internet, there are numerous opportunities to build a business without extensive financial commitment.

It’s not too difficult to hold down a job and start a side business. This option provides some security before making a big jump to the risks of owning your own business. Determine what your exact net after tax income requirements are to cover your expenses. You might be surprised that it’s not near as much as you thought.
Even if you don’t view yourself as a business owner and entrepreneur, consider what it might take to build some protection to your career in the event of the layoff or loss of full time employment (from your employer).
Two Additional Career Insurance Protection Components
Strong Network — Building and more importantly maintaining key connections with a network is imperative to the career insurance process. Networking is about building solid relationships over time and helping others. Look at your network and build a diversified background list of people. The wider the range of backgrounds the better.
Your Brand — Building your brand every day will make you more valuable to the marketplace. Consider what you offer to your employer with your skills and continue to see what skill set you can enhance. Invest In Yourself!
Is this easy? — Absolutely Not, but no “job” is secure today!
Just like the investment philosophy “don’t throw all your eggs in one basket” and diversify, consider the same related to your career.

Dying for Coverage: Charting the Insurance Gap
by Jaon Melcher
Most people in the United States have grown accustomed to the idea that each generation will live longer than the previous one. Indeed, a new study shows that the average life span for American men gained 11 years between 1960 and 2000; over the same period, the average life span for women grew by 7.5 years.
But this isn’t true for everyone.
Since 1983, life expectancy for 4 percent of the male population and 19 percent of the female population has either stagnated or worsened, according to the same groundbreaking study by the Harvard School of Public Health and the University of Washington.
Researchers used county data (the smallest measurable unit for mortality data available) in the study, titled “The Reversal of Fortunes,” and were the first to analyze the data over a long period of time — and the first to show a decline in life expectancy among the U.S. population.
“There has always been a view in U.S. health policy that inequalities are more tolerable as long as everyone’s health is improving,” said Majid Ezzati, lead author. “There is now evidence that there are large parts of the population in the United States whose health has been getting worse for two decades.”
The counties with the worst downward swings in life expectancy are in the Deep South, in Appalachia, along the Mississippi River, in the southern portions of the Midwest and in Texas. Researchers found worsening mortality to be largely linked to diabetes, cancers and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. An increase in HIV/AIDS and homicides played a role for men but not for women.
Other studies and surveys correlate to many of the Harvard/UW findings. One study by The Urban Institute estimated that at least 22,000 adults between the ages of 25 and 64 died in 2006 because they did not have health insurance.
Families USA, a leading health care consumer group, released a survey in April that extrapolated data using methodologies developed by the Institute of Medicine and The Urban Institute to estimate how many people of working age died each week in 2006 in each state because of a lack of health insurance.
Data show that one or two people die each week in a majority of states. Perhaps more interesting is the correlation between states with a higher level of insured residents and states that have instituted some form of health insurance reform.
Hawaii, the first state to set minimum health care benefits for workers, requires all employers to provide health insurance to employees working at least 20 hours a week. A smorgasbord of other options for groups and individuals, as well as managed care, brings a good number of Hawaiians under the health care umbrella. Still, the Families USA study showed that in 2006 some 10.4 percent still were not insured and one working-age Hawaiian dies each week for the lack of insurance.
That is a far cry from Texas, however, where nearly 28 percent of working-age people are uninsured and an estimated 49 die each week because of it, or even Alabama, where 20 percent are uninsured and an estimated seven die each week.
The survey shows “uninsurance is the third-leading cause of death for the near-elderly, following heart disease and cancer,” said Kathleen Stoll, executive deputy director of the organization.
The states showing up in the Families USA survey with the highest death rates fall in the same general regions identified in the Harvard/UW study.
Stoll suggested one reason for that: “There are common factors among states like West Virginia, Mississippi, Alabama and Texas — low levels of eligibility for federal programs.”
She noted that the ways states set rates for Medicaid are a key factor in health care for the working poor.
States can either choose to use the federal poverty level to determine Medicaid eligibility — $20,614 for a family of four — or base their eligibility requirements on a percentage of it; the result is that eligibility varies widely across the country.
Income eligibility for working parents ranges from 28 percent of the poverty level in Texas to 275 percent in Minnesota; for nonworking parents, Texas allows 13 percent of the federal level, and Minnesota again leads the pack with 275 percent.
The trend is toward higher allowances for Medicaid eligibility, with many states beginning to opt for coverage for people earning from 150 to 200 percent of the federal level.
Massachusetts, the first state to require that its residents hold health insurance or pay a penalty, now sets its income eligibility for health insurance coverage at 150 percent of the poverty level for full coverage and subsidizes people earning up to 300 percent of the level.
The Commonwealth Connector, Massachusetts’ independent health authority, enrolled about 350,000 people in health insurance in its first 18 months of operation, about half the estimated uninsured in the state, according to Jon Kingsdale, executive director.
“We reformed the individual nongroup market this summer, and we were able to get prices down by almost 50 percent and double the benefits,” Kingsdale said. He estimates about two-thirds of the remaining 300,000 people uninsured in the state earn less than 300 percent of the federal poverty level.
He offered an example of the good he’s seen as a result. “One of our first enrollees had a chronic sore throat for two years. She’d go to emergency rooms and walk-in clinics, and they’d pass her off with throat lozenges,” he said. “She got enrolled, got care and found out she had throat cancer. She stopped smoking, went through chemotherapy and is doing well today. Without care, she probably wouldn’t be here.”
The high percentage of women identified in the Harvard/UW study correlates in some ways with findings touted in the Families USA survey, which singled out the likelihood of uninsured women being diagnosed with advanced stages of breast cancer.

 “There’s no question that these people seek treatment later, and they may not get as good a treatment. If you’re not getting a checkup, you’re not going to get anything diagnosed early,” Stoll said.
Citing a federal program that encourages states to take advantage of a Medicaid program that allows testing for breast cancer, she was quick to add, “The real need is for health care reform where we provide people a reasonable health insurance and not go at it one disease at a time.”
Sign up for our free e-newsletter.
Are you on Facebook? Click here to become our fan.
Add our news to your site.

Insurance Giant Lloyd’s of London Warns Of ‘Unique And Hard-To-Manage Risk’ Of Arctic Ocean Oil Drilling

Analysts at one of the world’s largest insurance markets are warning that offshore drilling in the Arctic would “constitute a unique and hard-to-manage risk” and urged companies to “think carefully about the consequences of action” before exploring for oil in the region.
Lloyd’s of London, a large UK-based insurance pool, issued a report today outlining the severe environmental and economic risk of oil and gas drilling in Arctic waters. The stunning report comes as Royal Dutch Shell prepares for exploratory drilling operations in the Arctic — even while leading experts warn that there’s virtually no infrastructure in place to clean up an oil spill in the fragile region.
As Arctic ice continues to melt due to climate change, Lloyd’s estimates the region will attract $100 billion in new investment over the next decade. However, analysts warn that responding to an oil spill in a region “highly sensitive to damage” would present “multiple obstacles, which together constitute a unique and hard-to-manage risk.”
The environmental consequences of disasters in the Arctic have the potential to be worse than in other regions. The resilience of the Arctic’s ecosystems in terms of withstanding risk events is weak, and political sensitivity to a disaster is high. As a result, companies operating in the Arctic face significant reputational risk.
It’s easy for oil companies to dismiss environmentalists concerned about the Arctic as politically-motivated. But when a centuries-old company that has made billions of dollars judging risks and insuring everything from Betty Grable’s legs to the World Trade Center’s new Freedom Tower, thinks an operation might be a little too edgy for them, it ought to make oil companies stand up and take notice.
Richard Ward, Lloyd’s chief executive, “urged companies not to ‘rush in [but instead to] step back and think carefully about the consequences of that action’ before research was carried out and the right safety measures put in place.”
Lloyd’s report includes a laundry list of reasons why oil companies ought to hit the pause button on offshore Arctic drilling, including:
Significant knowledge gaps across the Arctic need to be closed urgently
Arctic conditions will remain challenging and often unpredictable
The environmental consequences of disasters in the Arctic are likely to be worse than in other regions
The politics of Arctic economic development are controversial and fluid.
Here in the U.S., Shell is on the brink of permits to begin drilling in the pristine Arctic Ocean this summer, despite the concerns of environmental groups, Alaska Native communities, and even federal agencies such as the US Coast Guard and NOAA. Aside from the long-term climate risk, their chief concerns revolve around Shell’s ability to respond to an oil spill challenging region — which can be dark, frigid, extremely remote, and sorely lacks even the most basic infrastructure.
The challenges posed by these harsh and unpredictable conditions are outlined in the Center for American Progress report, Putting a Freeze on Arctic Ocean Drilling: America’s Inability to Respond to an Oil Spill in the Arctic. As the two-year anniversary of the Deepwater Horizon tragedy approaches, it is critical to remember the plethora of personnel and resources needed to facilitate the largest, most coordinated oil spill response effort in our nation’s history. A similar undertaking would be impossible in the Arctic.
These warnings are echoed in the Lloyd’s report, as well as in a new independent federal report issued by the Government Accountability Office, which concluded that Shell’s “dedicated capabilities do not completely mitigate some of the environmental and logistical risks associated with the remoteness and environment of the region.”
As both the CAP report and Lloyd’s recommend, a substantial commitment to science and monitoring is necessary to “close knowledge gaps, reduce uncertainties and manage risks.” In addition, “full-scale exercises based on worst-case scenarios of environmental disaster should be run by companies,” as well as a significant investment in infrastructure and monitoring to facilitate “safe economic activity.”
If the world’s largest insurance market is warning companies to slow down because we are unprepared for the enormous risks of Arctic exploration, then the U.S. ought to think carefully before we encourage drilling.
Kiley Kroh is Associate Director of Communications for Oceans Communications at the Center for American Progress. Michael Conathan is the Director of Ocean Policy at the Center for American Progress.

What IoT Can do For Insurance Sector— Attend ‘Internet Of Insurance’ | 26–27Sept.,2017 | Austin, TX

‘Internet of Insurance’ is the Only Event for Insurers Capitalizing on the IoT Opportunity.
What’s different about Internet of Insurance 2017 —
North America’s only conference focused 100% on IoT applications for insurance
A 100% insurance delegation — Enabling structured peer-to-peer networking and a clarified senior audience to engage with
Network with insurance leaders in and out of the conference room: Practical and interactive workshops that will help you tailor discussions to your business needs and gain new ideas from other peers in the industry
All insurance companies attending are investing in IoT: Last year’s attendee combined IoT budget was $213 million!
30+ end-user case studies to help sharpen your business case for IoT adoption with frank and open discussion with peers
Peer-to-peer matchmaking and facilitated VIP introductions
Key Topics & Discussion Themes —
ROI and Business Buy-in for IoT and AI
Becoming Consumer-Centric
AI Applications in Insurance
Reducing Claims and Loss Ratios
Identifying Fraudulent Claims
Auto Telematics for Personal and Commercial Vehicles
Smart Homes
Wearables for Life Insurance and Workers’ Compensation
Enhancing Market Penetration for UBI
Insuring Autonomous Vehicles
Cybersecurity
Blockchain Applications
Sounds exciting, doesn’t it ?
Register yourself now : https://internetofbusiness.com/events/internet-of-insurance-usa/register/

Insurance Industry Is Targeting Blue Dogs To Shape Health Reform In Its Favor
By Zaid Jilani

In a new cover story, BusinessWeek claims that the “health insurers have already won” the battle over health care reform. According to the magazine, their strategy has been to “quietly” focus on “shaping the views” of more conservative Democrats. Central to the health insurers’ strategy is to target the Blue Dog Coalition, which includes Rep. Jim Matheson (D-UT) and Rep. Mike Ross (D-AR):
Impressing fiscally conservative Democrats like Matheson, a leader of the House of Representatives’ Blue Dog Coalition, is at the heart of UnitedHealth’s strategy. It boils down to ensuring that whatever overhaul Congress passes this year will help rather than hurt huge insurance companies. […]
Matheson, whose Blue Dogs command 52 votes in the House, can’t offer enough praise for UnitedHealth, the largest company of its kind. “The tried and true message of their advocacy,” he says, “is making sure the information they provide is accurate and considered.” […]
Fifteen years after the insurance industry helped kill then-President Bill Clinton’s health-reform initiative, Ross is frustrating the Obama White House by opposing proposals for a government-run insurance concern that would compete with private-sector companies.
The article goes on to note that United Health’s massive lobbying operation, which has spent more than $3.4 million during the first half of 2009, has enlisted the help of a large array of Washington insiders. Its lobbying operation appears to be paying off:
The industry has already accomplished its main goal of at least curbing, and maybe blocking altogether, any new publicly administered insurance program that could grab market share from the corporations that dominate the business. UnitedHealth has distinguished itself by more deftly and aggressively feeding sophisticated pricing and actuarial data to information-starved congressional staff members. With its rivals, the carrier has also achieved a secondary aim of constraining the new benefits that will become available to tens of millions of people who are currently uninsured. That will make the new customers more lucrative to the industry.
As ThinkProgress has noted, the Blue Dog Coalition is awash in corporate cash. The health care industry was the top donor to Matheson’s 2008 campaign, giving him hundreds of thousands of dollars. The health industry was also the top donor to Ross, a former pharmaceutial executive whose negotiations recently forced the Energy and Commerce committee to weaken its health care bill.
Despite the health care industry’s intense lobbying effort on capitol hill, several polls show that the majority of the American people remain strongly in support of the choice of a public health insurance plan. As Matt Yglesias has noted, “So just keep in mind that when people talk about political obstacles to a robust public plan, they’re not talking about mass public opinion as an obstacle — they’re talking about the wealth and power of relatively narrow interests.”
Update:
Congressman Ross bragged to reporters Wednesday morning about how the Blue Dogs weakened the public plan by “holding the [health care] bill hostage for ten days” in the Energy and Commerce committee.

Rep. Steve King: Unemployment Insurance Has Created ‘A Nation Of Slackers’
By Alex Seitz-Wald

Tea Party Rep. Steve King (R-IA) took to the House floor yesterday to give a diatribe against large swaths of of the social safety net, from food stamps to heating fuel subsidies, but reserved particular disdain for unemployment insurance, which he dismissed as “welfare for people that won’t work.” Via Political Correction:
KING: The United States of America borrows money and hands it to people and tells them, you don’t have to work for this. You don’t have to produce anything for this. We just want you to spend it. […]
The former speaker of the House, Speaker Pelosi, has consistently said that unemployment checks are one of those reliable and immediate forms of economy recovery. […] The 80 million Americans that are of working age but are simply not in the workforce need to be put to work. We can’t have a nation of slackers and then have me have to sit in the Judiciary Committee listening to them argue that there’s work that Americans won’t do, so we have to import people to do the work that Americans won’t do, and borrow money to pay the welfare for people that won’t work. That is a foolish thing for a nation to do. We’ve gotta get this country back to work and get those people out of the slacker rolls and onto the employed rolls.
Watch it:

King’s belief that people collecting unemployment checks are merely lazy is startingly common among conservatives, but it is as wrong as it is offensive to the million of Americans who are out of work by no choice of their own. In reality, there are 4.32 unemployed people for every job opening in the country, so even if every opening was filled, there would still be millions of people lacking employment.
Moreover, unemployment benefits are hardly generous, require beneficiaries to be actively searching for work, and run out after a certain period of time, so it’s unlikely someone would chose to remain unemployed. In fact, research by the San Francisco Federal Reserve has found that workers who qualify for unemployment benefits stay unemployed just 1.6 weeks longer than those who do not qualify for such benefits.
King calling unemployed Americans “slackers” is almost as bad as Rep. Blake Farenthold (R-TX) compared the jobless to alcoholics and drug addicts.

Why Most Insurance Stocks Are Stuck Below One Naira
While insurers in Africa’s largest economy have recorded a growth at the top lines amid continuing challenging macroeconomic conditions, their stock prices, on average, are stuck below N1, which suggests these firms need a new business model to gain investor confidence.
For the first three months through March 2016, the cumulative gross premiums written (GPW) of 13 insurance companies that have released first quarter 2016 financial statement on the floor of the exchange increased by 12.83 percent to N45.41 billion, from N40.40 billion the previous year.
Also, combined gross premiums income and net premiums income were up by 9.80 percent and 8.70 percent to N32.82 billion and N25.40 billion respectively.
The growth at the top lines can be attributed to the introduction of regulations by National Insurance Commission (NAICOM).
One of such regulations is the introduction of the No 1 premium No cover policy that made it mandatory that only cover for which payment has been received directly by the insurer or indirectly through a duly licensed insurance broker shall be recognized as income in the books of the insurer.
While premium income has improved and underwriting performance strengthened evidenced by a favourable combined ratio (CR) below the 100 threshold, the average share price of 13 insurance firms was 61K as June 20 2016, on the NSE.
Industry experts attribute the unattractive stock price of these firms to different strategic reasons.
The first is that investors don’t understand the intricacies of an insurance business and their expansion plans are vague.
The second is the problem of matching investment returns with liabilities, these mismatch easily discourage investors from swooping on insurance stocks.
The third is that investors lack confidence in the ability of management to deliver on their strategic objective of maximising shareholders value given lack of history for paying steady dividends and weak financial ratios.
“ Insurance is more of a long term business than short term so for people that are interested in short term equity gains, insurance might not be what they are interested in,” said the an insurance expert who craved anonymity.

No Insurance? Here are 5 Ways HealthTap can Help

Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, the number of uninsured Americans has dropped to a near historic low. Health insurance is especially key in preventive care, which includes physicals, immunizations, and screenings for various medical conditions like cancer, diabetes, and blood pressure. Preventive care helps individuals avoid future illnesses by catching current issues before they become full-fledged problems. An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of a cure, and it also tends to be less expensive in the long run.
For those who are still uninsured, health management options can seem limited. Doctor and ER visits are costly and inconvenient, and most online information is generalized, tailored to the masses. Online articles can’t diagnose your problems, but what else can you do?
HealthTap It.
With HealthTap, you have full access to the largest and most comprehensive health knowledgebase created — curated, edited, and organized by doctors themselves. Our Medical Expert Network is 65,000 strong (and growing!), covering 137 specialties. If you’re uninsured, here are five ways we can help you.

1. Browse our doctor-created content
Making an educated decision about your health depends on reliable medical knowledge. On average, HealthTap doctors have an average of 21 years in practice (1.6 million years total) across 137 specialties. They’ve answered 2.6 billion questions and written several thousand tips on hundreds of thousands of healthy-living and medical topics. Anyone can access this trusted information — for free!
2. Use our checklists to track your healthy living goals
Are you trying to lose weight? Gain weight? Manage a chronic condition? Our doctors have created checklists (also free!) on hundreds of healthy-living goals. Taking action to improve your health and well-being demands commitment. Lifestyle changes don’t happen overnight, and these checklists will help you track your progress.

3. Ask a free, anonymous question
Still haven’t found what you’re looking for? Ask a question! Access to health information is great, but it’s easy to start overthinking your symptoms and misdiagnose yourself. Before you know it, you think you’re affected by several different illnesses — all of them terrible, horrible, no good, very bad ones that are expensive to treat. Avoid the unnecessary panic attacks and worst-case scenarios by asking a specific question (still free!). Every question is answered by a doctor, usually within a day or two.
Best of all, these questions are totally anonymous, so there’s no need to tell those little white lies most people typically tell at the doctor’s office. Did you have too much to drink? Typically get four hours of sleep, overcaffeinate, or eat second and third servings at meals? Whether you’ve experimented with recreational drugs or never exercise, our doctors won’t judge. Try asking a question now.

4. Use HealthTap Prime to get 24/7 access to a primary care physician
Did you know that 30%–50% of doctor visits don’t actually require an in-person physical exam? According to Debt.Org, the average urgent care visit costs $155, while the average ER visit costs $570. At only $99/month, HealthTap Prime is a convenient, cost-effective, and efficient option. It’s the best way to have unlimited, direct access to a primary care physician: on-demand virtual care, available 24/7.
Our doctors are easily accessible via HD video or text chat on any mobile device or personal computer, securely and privately. From new parents to regular individuals, HealthTap Prime is perfect for peace of mind. Our doctors can also issue prescriptions and refills, delivered straight to your local pharmacy, and refer you to a specialist.
For a 30-day trial to HealthTap Prime, click here: http://htap.it/PrimeOffer.
5. Don’t forget that we can also give you a second, third, even tenth opinion
Sometimes, you need more than a primary care physician. If you’re uninsured and have a particular condition or illness, HealthTap Concierge connects you to your own personal doctor or specialists of your choice. Affordably priced at $44 a consult, it’s close to the cost of a typical copay — so you get real value and quick, ultra-convenient peace of mind.
HealthTap Concierge also allows you to build a Care Team of high-quality care providers at no cost by providing 24/7 access to the Virtual Practices of more than one million doctors from 105 medical specialties. Anyone can get a second, third, or even tenth opinion from top specialists via HD video or secure text chat from anywhere in the world. You can shedule an appointment or request a live video/chat during your doctor’s office hours.
HealthTap is a place where you can learn more about your health, get help from top doctors, and take action to feel good everyday. Are you ready to take control of your health? Sign up for a free HealthTap account!

Hispanics Are Filling Jobs in America — and Creating Them
Contributor Octavio Pina owns and operates an Allstate insurance agency in Santa Ana, California.
When Samuel Mejia and his wife Sandra migrated from Medellín, Colombia, to Atlanta in 2003, they struggled to make ends meet. But they believed in hard work and perseverance, and they had gumption. Sandra’s customers at the Hispanic markets where she worked asked frequently where they could find the beauty products — vitamins, shampoo, soap, hair gel, even laundry detergent — they’d grown up using in Mexico and Central America. The Mejias started importing these hard-to-find, highly sentimental items, and in 2005 Multicell, a small wholesale business offering health and beauty products, was born. Today, they have five employees and 20 subcontractors selling and delivering goods.
Seeing a need and filling it: That’s the story of American ingenuity and entrepreneurship, and more and more, Hispanic Americans, like the Mejias and like me with my insurance agency, are its main characters. Between 2007 and 2012, the depth of the recession and recovery, the number of Hispanic-owned businesses grew by almost 50 percent. Hispanics own 3.3 million businesses, and in 2012 — the latest year for which statistics are available — we employed 2.3 million workers and generated $474 billion in revenue.
At more than 17 percent of the population, Hispanic Americans are now our nation’s largest minority group, a group that is creating employment opportunities and boosting the economy, too. With strong support — and our projected growth to almost 30 percent of the population by 2060 — we have the potential to employ even more people and to expand economic prosperity through businesses that we often build from the ground up.
Yes, many Hispanic immigrants initially take on entry-level jobs, like Sandra did when she and Samuel first arrived. In their pursuit of a good livelihood for their families, these members of the Hispanic workforce follow in the footsteps of immigrants of diverse backgrounds who’ve come to our shores for generations. They follow a worthy and well-traveled path toward the American Dream.
For many of us, that dream includes building a business of our own, one where we call the shots, are able to realize our own visions, and hold the creative reins. Those are the reasons I got into real estate and then insurance. And those aspirations make Hispanics and other minorities very similar to other American entrepreneurs, according to the Allstate/USA TODAY Small Business Barometer’s national survey of more than 2,600 small-business owners. In fact, the survey shows Hispanics are more optimistic about the small business environment than most, with a score of 87 out of 100 vs. the national score of 79, and we contribute to diverse sectors of the economy. Hispanic entrepreneurs own construction firms and TV stations, tattoo parlors and greeting card companies, trendy restaurants and down-home pupusa trucks, health care providers and tech start-ups.
As a mentor to new business owners in my community of Santa Ana, California, where more than 78 percent of the population is Hispanic, I understand the challenges Hispanic entrepreneurs often face when getting started, such as a lack of capital and difficulty securing bank loans. A study released in late 2015 by the Stanford Latino Entrepreneurship Initiative found among Hispanic business owners “a near-absence of conventional institutional capital sources,” such as commercial bank and government loans. The authors attribute the lack both to many Hispanics’ minimal of knowledge of loan programs and to the fact that large numbers (one-third) who applied were denied funding. The authors also discovered that Hispanic-founded companies make up less than 1 percent of venture-backed startups.
Just as importantly, though, the Stanford study underlines what I’ve seen time and again among my Hispanic peers: We’re entrepreneurial and innovative, know the value of technology to growth and want to expand. That is why it’s important to recognize the contributions Hispanics are making and to invest in our growth. Doing so boosts a growing segment of American business.
I’m heartened that in places like Tampa Bay, Florida, and Napa Valley, California, entrepreneurial organizations, Hispanic professionals and community colleges are offering bilingual business development workshops and one-on-one advising geared toward Hispanic entrepreneurs. In Los Angeles, two Harvard-educated brothers have started a venture-backed firm that helps match Hispanic businesses to lenders, guiding them before and after they receive loans.
At a time when others are forgoing entrepreneurship, Hispanics are diving in, despite many challenges. That’s a shining example of the American spirit and the very ideals that make our country a great place to do business.

3 Charts: How Conservatives Are Making Millions Of Americans Go Without Health Insurance
An enrollment counselor helps Jerome Davis Jr. 36, sign up for Medicaid in Chicago. CREDIT: AP PHOTO/M. SPENCER GREEN
Despite the fact that Obamacare’s major provisions went into effect at the beginning of 2014, about 30 million people remain uninsured in the United States. That’s partly because some people are ineligible for coverage because of their immigration status. But, according to a new issue brief from the Kaiser Family Foundation, it’s also because a lot of Americans are going without insurance even though they’re supposed to be eligible under the health law.
According to Kaiser researchers, who surveyed a representative sample of more than 10,000 adults, most of the uninsured people in the country have incomes that qualify them to receive financial assistance under Obamacare. They could either get subsidies to help them purchase private plans on the new state-level marketplaces, or they could enroll in public plans in their state’s expanded Medicaid program.
For instance, about 54 percent of the people who are currently uninsured have family incomes below the threshold — up to 138 percent of the federal poverty line — that’s intended to be covered by Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion:

Some of the people who remain uninsured are simply unaware of their coverage options, and may perceive health insurance as too expensive because they don’t realize how they might benefit from its provisions aimed at low-income Americans. Previous research confirms this has been a particularly big problem in red states, where anti-Obamacare lawmakers haven’t dedicated as many resources to trying to promote the law. There, patients are less likely to get information about how health reform could affect them.
But some of them are locked out of affordable coverage altogether. Since the Supreme Court ruled the law’s Medicaid expansion to be optional, that’s left an opening for GOP-controlled states to resist it — and some conservative lawmakers are still stubbornly refusing to expand the program. Kaiser estimates that about 18 percent of the adults who are currently uninsured fall into this Medicaid coverage gap:

The uninsured people who aren’t currently benefiting from Obamacare don’t have a lot of other options open to them. According to Kaiser, more than three-fourths of them have no access to insurance through an employer. About one in four uninsured people are working at a job that doesn’t offer them health care — the so-called “working poor” population that the Medicaid expansion was specifically intended to help:

Kaiser’s new research aligns with previous reports estimating that millions of low-income people of color are being locked out of Obamacare altogether because of their lawmakers’ resistance to Medicaid expansion. Last fall, the New York Times analyzed the data about the coverage gap and confirmed that the Americans being denied Medicaid are cashiers, cooks, nurses’ aides, waiters and waitresses, and janitors. If every state accepted the Medicaid expansion, the national uninsurance rate would be an estimated two percentage points lower.
The policy does appear to be gaining momentum in some GOP-controlled states that have forged ahead with public-private compromises to traditional Medicaid expansion. However, some of those proposals have gotten some criticism for requiring low-income people to pay premiums in order to use their Medicaid coverage. Iowa, Michigan, Arkansas, Indiana, and Pennsylvania currently require Medicaid beneficiaries to finance part of their public insurance plans.
That could become an issue particularly in light of Kaiser’s new findings about uninsured Americans’ cost barriers to getting covered. “Additional work is needed to understand whether affordability provisions in the ACA are sufficient to enable lower-income people to take up coverage,” the researchers conclude.

Insurance — Photography by Rasica bit.ly/rasica #rain #fields #storm


Top Insurance Lobbyist: Obamacare Is Already Encouraging Greater Efficiency In Health Care
By Sy Mukherjee

In a Medicare Advantage hearing before the House Ways and Means Health Subcommittee on Friday, America’s Health Insurance Plans (AHIP) President Karen Ignagni confirmed that Obamacare is encouraging health care providers and private insurers to adjust their business models, just as the law was intended to do.
Although Ignagni noted that some of Obamacare’s provisions — such as its modifications to Medicare Advantage’s repayment structure — concern the insurance industry, she nonetheless acknowledged that the law has prompted health care providers, government agencies, and insurance companies to coordinate their care strategies while reexamining payment models:
REP. RON KIND (D-WI): Miss Ignagni, I know you and the plans that you represent in that, have been at the forefront when it comes to a lot of these changes and reforms. I think we need to be doing it on a parallel path between Medicare and the private plans out there. I don’t think doing it in isolation is going to work. Could you give us a quick update on what you’re seeing happening, especially in the private sector right now,with these types of delivery and payment reforms that are happening?
IGNAGNI: […] There are very significant changes going on all across the country. […] The story is about collaboration, health plans and clinicians collaborating inpatient-centered medical homes to bring more value to, and case management to, those with chronic illnesses, and taking those strategies into Medicare Advantage, Medicaid plans, SNIPS, and so on and so forth. […] What is very significant now as a result of these strategies, health plans are showing in peer reviewed journal data that they’re working, with respect to re-admissions, emergency rooms, so we’re not finished by any means…but we have taken a major step and it clearly has to be the future, more coordinated care, more prospective payment, and partnerships between plans and clinicians and hospitals.
Watch it:

Coordinated case management is essential to providing patients with more efficient care. The more that hospitals, insurance providers, and clinicians cooperate and bundle their services and payments, the easier it becomes for American consumers to seek out flat-rate, quality care. As Ignagni mentions, there has been evidence in states such as Massachusetts that coordinated-care facilities treating dedicated patient pools for prospective, bundled fees (pre-determined flat rates) are accruing savings while maintaining high Medicare quality-metrics.

Colorado Extends Insurance Nondiscrimination Protections To LGBT Community
By Andrew Cray

Last week, the Colorado Division of Insurance became the second state agency in the week to issue a bulletin stating that discrimination in health coverage on the basis of sexual orientation and transgender status is impermissible under state law. The bulletin is the latest in a series of decisions by states and employers clearly stating that no person should be denied health care or coverage based on who they are.
The bulletin clarifies that existing law in Colorado prohibits discriminatory practices by insurers, including:
Denying coverage to a transgender person for medically necessary care that would be covered under current standards for any other individual
Charging more for health insurance based on a person’s sexual orientation and gender identity or expression.
One Colorado and the Colorado Consumer Health Initiative have been working closely with the Colorado Division of Insurance to seek legal clarification in response to input from Colorado’s transgender community. And the result reflects the growing movement toward equitable health insurance policies at the state and federal level.
Ending discriminatory policies that deny transgender people access to medically necessary care reflects basic values of fairness, and it also aligns with the consensus among major medical associations that transition-related health care is medically necessary for many transgender individuals and that determination of what care an individual patient needs properly rests with medical providers, not insurance companies.
Read the full bulletin and the FAQ from One Colorado and the Colorado Consumer Health Initiative.

Why The Public Health Insurance Option Is Worth Fighting For
Our guest blogger is Gov. Howard Dean, former chairman of the DNC and the author of Howard Dean’s Prescription For Real Health Care Reform.

In today’s Washington Post, Steven Pearlstein argues that Democrats should just give up on the public option. “Enough already with the public option!,” he writes. Steven thinks we should drop one of the most popular and effective aspects of health care reform simply because the fight is too politically difficult in Congress. I think such an approach would ruin health care reform and devastate the Democratic party.
Steven is confusing health insurance reform with health care reform. If we only get reform that requires insurance companies to provide coverage to everyone who applies, charge everyone the same premiums, and end their discriminatory practices, that would be great insurance reform, but it’s not, as Steven writes, health care reform.
Real health care reform that includes a new public health insurance option would give Americans a real choice and not reward for-profit health insurers with 47 milllion new customers. Real health care reform that includes a new public health insurance option would cut out the administrative waste of private insurers and begin changing the way health care is delivered. Real health care reform that includes a new public health insurance option could adopt the kind of payment reforms that would start to “hold down long-term growth in health spending” and encourage providers to deliver care more efficiently. We know that premiums in the public option would be about 10 percent lower and that a real robust plan that piggy backs off of Medicare’s infrastructure could save us somewhere between $75 billion and $150 billion over 10 years.
Just because the public health insurance option is “new,” moreover, does not mean it’s not worth fighting for. Steven points out that I did not propose a robust public option in 2004 election. The measure of good politics and policy is the ability to accept and identify new ideas. My 2004 plan may not have included a new stand-alone program, but it did allow Americans over 55 to enroll in Medicare and everyone under 25 would have been eligible for Medicaid.
I believed that government could help expand coverage and control costs then, and the overwhelming majority of Americans believe it today. If the August recess has taught us one thing, it’s that Republicans have ended all serious conversations about reform and will oppose reform whether it includes a public option or not. They want to make the choice for the American people instead of letting Americans have their own choice of coverage. And if Democrats follow their lead, they will have to face the voters’ choice come November.

Distinguishing Between Good And Bad Health Insurance Lobbying
By Igor Volsky

Center For Public Integrity is reporting that five of the nation’s largest health insurance companies are considering forming a nonprofit organization to better influence the implementation of health care reform and bolster the industry’s image. “The insurers’ goal will be to help elect members who can be allies in the all important regulatory writing process now underway to implement key parts of the health care legislation that was signed into law earlier this year”:
The two sources tell the Center for Public Integrity they expect millions of dollars will be pumped into issue advertising in a number of races where candidates sympathetic to health industry concerns have a shot at winning.

“The objective is to make the House more accommodating to concerns that have been raised,” says one industry source. “They’re looking at toss-up candidates,” adding that the companies want to “focus resources to influence campaigns.” […]
The sources stress that insurers are particularly concerned at this stage about a provision in the new law that mandates they spend 80 cents of every premium dollar received on the welfare of patients. The high financial stakes mean insurers have been pushing hard with state regulators to allow for broader definitions of what constitutes patient welfare expenditures. This issue is “probably the most important one right now,” explains a source.
The campaign may be an alternative to the industry’s long-time lobbying group America’s Health Insurance Plans (AHIP), which has represented the industry throughout the health care reform debate. Industry sources are telling Politico’s Pulse that “they feel the group wasn’t strong enough during the reform battle and they’re not convinced it has the muscle to deliver during implementation.” “The insurance industry sources argue that the industry got little out of the year-long Hill battle: the individual mandate is relatively weak and the industry is still getting hammered by reform supporters.”
AHIP has already promised to work alongside federal and state regulators to implement the new reform law “effectively” and to the extent that the industry’s goals intersect with the objectives of reform, a partnership with insurers could lead to some real progress. The government can rely on the industry and its expertise to adapt the payment reform models in Medicare to the private sector, develop administrative simplifications, or encrouage Americans to enroll in insurance coverage. As Jon Kingsdale, former director of the Commonwealth Connector Authority, has pointed out, the implementation process would probably benefit from this kind of industry input.
But if insurers are only looking to inflate their medical loss ratios by reclassifying certain administrative services as “medical” or undermining the rate review processes, then they’re working against the public interest and it will be up to us to publicly involve ourselves in the implementation process and counter the industry offensive.

VIDEO: Liberty University Students Call It ‘Un-Christian’ To Allow People To Die Because They Lack Health Insurance
By Scott Keyes
ThinkProgress filed this report from Liberty University in Lynchburg, Virginia.

The most distasteful moment in Monday’s Republican presidential debate was when CNN’s Wolf Blitzer asked whether a 30 year old who gets in a catastrophic accident should be allowed to die if he doesn’t have health insurance and the Tea Party audience cheered in approval, shouting “yes!”
Following the debate, many commentators were taken aback by the death cheer, especially from a party that regularly touts its “Christian values.”
Yesterday, ThinkProgress discussed the matter with a number of students at Liberty University, a conservative Christian college founded by Jerry Falwell in Lynchburg, Virginia. The students were unanimous in their disapproval, calling it “un-Christian” to simply allow a person to die because they were uninsured. Unlike the cheering Tea Party audience, Liberty students we spoke with said the “Christian thing to do” would be to provide care to those in need, regardless of their personal situation.

The disturbing incident in Monday’s debate was actually the second time in as many weeks that Republican debate attendees have applauded death. During the California debate last week, the audience cheered the fact that 234 people have been executed under Gov. Rick Perry’s (R) watch in Texas.
Though the Republican Party that used to say it represented “compassionate conservatism,” their base has taken an ugly turn of late. For many Christian conservatives, the idea of cheering anybody’s death may finally be a bridge too far.
Transcript following the jump:
KEYES: In the debate on Monday, there was the question of whether or not a 30 year old who doesn’t have health insurance and gets in a major accident, we ought to just let him die or we ought to provide care for him. What do you think would be the Christian thing to do?
STUDENT 1: Definitely to give him care, no matter what your age is.
KEYES: What do you think the Christian thing to do there is?
STUDENT 2: If he didn’t have health insurance?
KEYES: Yeah.
STUDENT 2: I would say take care of him.
KEYES: Do you think it’s un-Christian to be letting uninsured people die? What would you do?
STUDENT 3: Why would someone let anyone die just because they can’t pay for something? That’s the thing I don’t understand. Me and my family, we’re financially impaired right now, we’re in a shelter. We have insurance and all that, but at the same time for those who don’t have insurance, what’s the point of killing someone, taking a life, just because they can’t pay for something? It’s like going to a hospital, charging millions of dollars to have an operation to save someone’s life, they can’t pay for it, okay so we’ve got to kill them? We can’t save a life because they can’t pay for it? That doesn’t make any sense to me, I don’t understand.
KEYES: Do you think that’s a Christian thing to let an uninsured person die?
STUDENT 4: Absolutely not. I don’t see how that’s Christian in any way. I mean “Christian.” I think everyone has the right to life, including I don’t agree with capital punishment, I think that those people also have a right to life.
KEYES: What do you think the Christian thing to do there would be?
STUDENT 5: I believe provide care for him. I believe we should provide some care for him.
KEYES: What do you think, do you think that it would be Christian to let uninsured people die?
STUDENT 6: I don’t think it is. I think that they should work towards making sure that people no matter what should live.
STUDENT 3: I bet if Jesus came back right now, all them politicians, all them doctors who had to do something like that would probably give their life to Christ because they felt so bad about themselves. Because they knew that they took a life just because someone couldn’t pay for it.

7 Reasons to Buy International Travel Insurance Before Going Abroad

Traveling abroad requires vigilance like no other. You’re in a different part of the world — a place where you need to have your bases covered.
If you get sick or injured abroad without any travel insurance, your medical bills will put a serious dent in your wallet. International travel insurance is what you need when you go out of your home country.
Here are 7 reasons why you need international travel insurance if you plan to travel abroad.
1) Domestic insurance can’t help you when you’re out of the country.
It’s called “domestic” insurance for a reason — it’s applicable when you’re at home. Many health insurance policies are limited to claims made within your home country.
2) Many countries require it
Countries like the United Arab Emirates require international health insurance. This is to avoid any grueling process that may occur during a health mishap, as there is a tremendous cost placed on the visiting country should they have to take care of you.

3) You’re not a superhero
Spoiler alert. Humans are breakable. Even if you’re the most careful traveler in the world, accidents happen. Just ask Mark Kogelman, a professional skier who found himself nearly paralyzed in a Chilean hospital.

Read Mark’s Story.
4) Accidents
Most think that international insurance only applies for extreme adventures abroad. However, this is not the case. Things happen when you least expect them, so you better be prepared.

5) Water
Most people — especially those from Western countries — take water for granted. But in some countries, a drink of water can send you rushing to the nearest hospital. Water-borne illnesses can require intensive hospital care. This can set you back tens of thousands of dollars by the time you’re cleared to leave.
6) New activities
One of the best things about vacation is that you’re able to try new things. As you can imagine, this brings with it the threat of injury from those new activities. Your body just isn’t used to the new stimuli.
For example, a high-altitude hike can take a toll on your health. Your lungs need to put in extra effort to adjust to the new surroundings. This is a potential health hazard, one you must be prepared to get on top of.

7) Global unrest
Terrorism and civil unrest is a scary subject, but something you need to think about. Especially in light of recent events in France and Turkey. If you find yourself in the wrong place at the wrong time, a seemingly safe trip can quickly become a life-or-death situation.
Conclusion
International travel insurance is not a burden. In reality, it’s a small expense that can protect you from physical and financial ruin.
Click below to learn more about the benefits of international travel insurance.

This originally appeared on the Insurabroad Blog

GOP Gubernatorial Candidate: Health Insurance Shouldn’t Cover Doctors’ Visits
By Sy Mukherjee

During a policy breakfast for the Loudoun County Chamber of Commerce last August, Virginia state attorney general and gubernatorial candidate Ken Cuccinelli (R-VA) compared health care coverage to car insurance, and argued that insurance plans shouldn’t cover routine care such as doctors’ visits.
According to an account of the meeting in the Ashburn Patch, Cuccinelli claimed that insurance was “never intended” to cover services like doctor visits and was meant to be limited to catastrophic illnesses. To illustrate his logic, Cuccinelli pointed out that car insurance doesn’t pay for routine maintenance such as oil changes.
Many conservatives have pushed catastrophic care as a way of dealing with rising costs. But these types of plans force consumers who have anything other than a devastating illness or accident to pay for all of their care out-of-pocket or forgo it entirely. Doctors’ visits and regular preventative care, on the other hand, can prevent many of the conditions that may cause a catastrophic condition to form in the first place.
Update:
This story has been updated to reflect the fact that the meeting took place in August of 2012.

Health insurance CEOs conspire to blame Democrats for increasing premiums.

Since passage of the Affordable Care Act, health insurance companies have begun laying the groundwork to blame Democrats for the increased health care costs that they plan to impose on consumers. Last Tuesday, CIGNA CEO David Cordani told Neil Cavuto that health care premiums will continue to increase despite the new health care law. And in an interview with Charlie Rose, Aetna CEO Ron Williams said that his company also plans to jack up rates:
ROSE: Will insurance premiums go up?
WILLIAMS: The answer is yes, and some of the things that will drive those premiums are significant additional taxes the industry will ultimately have to pay in the first year.
Williams is lying. In fact, the health care law does not tax insurance issuers until 2014. Moreover, as Igor Volsky writes, insurers are disingenuously trying to point the fingers at hospitals and doctors to avoid a conversation about their own failed efforts to control costs while raking in profits.

STUDY: Young Americans Won’t Avoid Obamacare Simply Because They Don’t Want To Buy Insurance

Uninsured young adults understand they need health care and will purchase it as long as it’s affordable, according to the results from a new study from the nonpartisan Commonwealth Fund.
The study’s lead author, Sara Collins, pointed out that the results contradict the popular theory that young adults don’t think they need any insurance coverage because they feel invincible. That’s been one of the primary arguments used to make the point that Obamacare’s insurance marketplaces will end up being unworkable because young Americans won’t sign up.
“Contrary to commonly held beliefs, young adults do want affordable health coverage,” Dr. David Blumenthal, the president of the Commonwealth Fund, explained.
The Commonwealth researchers reached that conclusion by examining what young adults have historically chosen to do when they’re offered an opportunity to buy health insurance — which, for people who have access to employer-sponsored health care, already happens through their jobs. When young Americans are given the option to purchase that employer-based coverage, 67 percent take it. And only a very small number of the people who turn it down, five percent, say they made that choice because they simply don’t think they need insurance. Instead, most of them say they’re either already covered by a family member (54 percent) or wouldn’t be able to afford the plan’s premiums (22 percent).
This aligns with previous research from the Kaiser Family Foundation that found that most young adults do think insurance is important, and want to buy it for themselves. Kaiser’s study also found that this demographic’s biggest barrier to health insurance isn’t actually the assumption that they’re young and invincible — it’s the high cost of health care.
In the lead-up to Obamacare’s new insurance marketplaces, which will open for enrollment in less than two months, many campaigns have focused on figuring out how to convince young adults — often labeled “young invincibles” — that insurance is important for them and they should buy it. But the research suggests that the real question isn’t whether young people can be persuaded that they need coverage, but rather whether that coverage will be affordable for them under Obamacare.
The Commonwealth researchers think it probably will be. Their new study points out that the majority of uninsured young adults in the country — more than 80 percent of an estimated 16 million young people who don’t currently have health care — will qualify for some kind of subsidized coverage under Obamacare. They’ll either be eligible for Medicaid after the health law expands the public program’s coverage pools, or they’ll qualify for federal subsidies to help them buy insurance in the new state-level marketplaces. The study concludes that “affordability is less likely to impede enrollment in health insurance via state exchanges.”
There has been a lot of speculation about whether rising premiums under Obamacare will make health care too expensive for young people, but much of that media coverage has neglected to consider the effect of the subsidies. In fact, between 65 and 70 percent of the young adults who have individual health plans will qualify for Obamacare subsidies, since they tend to make less money than older people. Furthermore, since the majority of Americans already get their health coverage through an employer, a public program, or a family member, it’s important to remember that the premiums in the new marketplaces are likely to impact just eight percent of the total U.S. population.


Job Vacancy: Chief Data Officer — Zurich Insurance Company — South Africa:
Looking for an exciting senior management position in the insurance industry? Check out the vacancy of Chief Data Officer at Zurich Insurance Company.
Originally published on Tumblr

Who Benefits When Mike Dang Dies? Chatting About Life Insurance

Ester: Mike, do you have a will?
Meaghan: Leave all your ad impressions to me and Ester.
Ester: Or to that random NJ banker con artist!
Mike: Ha, well my mom gets more than $1 million from my life insurance policies.
Ester: Whoa! Your life is worth a lot.
Mike: What is your policy worth, Ester?
Ester: You think I have life insurance??
Mike: Well! It makes more sense for you to have one instead of me since you have a child.
Ester: Actually maybe I do? I have no idea. I might have gotten it through my job at one point and it was one of those things where companies sent me envelopes that I didn’t open. That happened for a while.
Mike: Hah, and I only pay about $35 a month for mine.
Ester: Ben has insurance, or did have it, through his job.
Mike: Oh, nice.
Meaghan: We didn’t get it.
Mike: Why not?
Meaghan: I dunno, we debated when I got pregnant, and I’m still not sure. But the fact that I/we have that chunk of savings from the stock options already was part of it. And that neither of us are really dependent on the other for income right now.
Mike: I think I’ve told you guys this story, but my mom was convinced I was going to die when I was 18, and she wanted to make sure there was money to take care of funeral arrangements or whatever, so I have had it since then.
Meaghan: Wow.
Ester: Um.
Mike: And with term insurance, it often increases as you move into it.
Ester: This chat can be called “Who Benefits if Mike Dies?”
Meaghan: So term insurance premiums increase as you age, right? Like if you “get in early” are they lower, but if you get it when you’re 40, is the premium higher?
Mike: Yes. When I started I paid about $15, and not it’s closer to $40 a month.
Meaghan: Interesting! See we didn’t get it because we don’t feel like we need it now, but if we decide later…
Mike: The older you start, the more it costs because as you age you are … more likely to die?
Meaghan: This stuff is really dark.
Ester: Please insert a screencap of THE SEVENTH SEAL here:

Mike: I think I started at $300,000 in coverage.
Ester: Did your mom set it up with her / your brothers as the beneficiary?
Mike: Hah, no, I set it up. I was 18! An adult.
Meaghan: Did someone like, come to your home and give you a check-up? Check your blood pressure?
Mike: I saw my regular doctor. Just that one time, like, I never had to give them an update, like, “Oh, FYI: I started smoking at weddings. But weddings only!”
Ester: Ha! You can’t say that on the record.
Mike: Can’t wait to get my plan terminated after they see this.
Meaghan: “WE READ YOUR FRIDAY CHATS, MIKE!”
Ester: There was just a New Yorker article about a dude who kept taking out insurance policies on people in Chicago and then killing them and because the Chicago police are so dumb and awful he kept getting away with the murders which means the insurance company kept having to pay.
Mike: That is insane.
Ester: Yeah. AllState was like, “You are not in good hands.” “Our good hands are tied.” And other sad jokes as well. Anyway eventually he went to prison for something.
Meaghan: Murder? lol
Mike: Lol, that would make sense?

Murder is never funny, though incompetence kind of is maybe? In a sad way? The New Yorker piece in question can be found here.

Reader Mail: Do I Need This Insurance Policy?

Several years ago my mom got me a long term care insurance policy through her job. She paid for it and I never thought about it until a year or two ago money got tight for her and she handed me the bill and said I should start paying for it. I didn’t really want the insurance and I definitely didn’t want to pay for it but she kind of guilted/scared me into continuing to pay for it.
Over the last year I’ve had a lot of unexpected expenses and I have credit card debt I’m trying to pay down. I let the long term care insurance expire but I’m still feeling a little guilty. For reference, I’m 29, own a house and car (obviously I’m still making payments on the house and will be for many years) and have a full time job, plus babysitting on the side a couple times a month. The long term care insurance was about $400-$500 a year.
Do I need long term insurance coverage? Should I get a new plan once I have my finances in order? Also I’ve heard that some of them are semi-scams that don’t cover much or have restrictions on what they will cover. At this point it kind of seems crazy to put so much money into something that I may not use for 40 years or more. But then on the other hand I guess I could get in a car accident and be paralyzed tomorrow? — S.L.

Yes, you could get in a car accident and be paralyzed tomorrow. You could also die in a fire, or drown, or get cancer, or have a heart attack. We are human, we are not immortal, and our lives can change at any given moment.
Things happen to ourselves and our things — that’s why we get health insurance, renters or homeowners insurance, fire, flood and earthquake insurance, car insurance, life insurance, and all the other things out there we think fit to insure on top of all the other bills we have to pay.
The point I am trying to make is that there are a lot of things that we’re financially responsible for, and a lot of different insurance policies that are worth paying for because of the circumstances of the individual world we live in. In the individual world you live, S.L., is long term care insurance a priority?
While you think that over, I’m going to tell you now that you’re the first person under the age of 50 who I have ever heard of buying and maintaining a long term care insurance policy.
Long term care insurance typically covers basic daily care for you for an extended period of time, if say, you get Alzheimer’s disease, or have a chronic illness that requires a part or full-time nurse to bathe, dress and feed you on a daily basis at a hospital, or at home or at a nursing facility. Notice those terms I’ve used — Alzheimer’s and nursing facility — because they’re typically associated with the elderly, as is long term care insurance, because it’s more likely you’ll need to have it when you’re reaching the age of retirement. People typically decide to buy long term health insurance in their 50s, and by the age of 60. Buying it before then is atypical.
You are 29 — do you know any other 29-year-olds with long term care insurance? That question doesn’t matter as much as: In your individual world, does long term care insurance make sense? Does your family have a history of developing chronic illnesses at an early age? Is that why your mother felt compelled to buy you a policy? If yes, then long term care insurance isn’t such a crazy thing to get at your age. And if yes, do sit down and read the policy over — you should definitely know what it does and doesn’t cover.
In my individual world, I got very sick when I was 18, so I have a 20-year-term life insurance policy that would ensure that my parents are financially taken care of if I were to die today. I pay for it because I can afford to shell out $35 a month — it is in no way a burden for me.
My folks have earthquake insurance, because they live in California, and an earthquake is a real thing that could happen in their individual world. We prioritize on what we should pay for based on our circumstances. You have nothing to feel guilty about if you decide not to pay for a thing that doesn’t make sense in your individual world.
See previous columns here. Photo: Shutterstock/Mandy Godbehear

Yeah, we have pet insurance on all our furries so that takes money out of the debate for us. When I lost Foofer (cat), I hated having money be even a part of the care process. The insurance is expensive, but I didn’t even have to think about the cost of anything this time around; the difference in clarity for me was worth every monthly cent. It sucks that money should factor in so much (or it sucks that I’m broke; whichever).
I’m glad you got 12 more years with yours!

Ryan Family Financially Benefits From The Health Insurance Industry
Vice presidential candidate Paul Ryan’s wife, Janna, has previously worked as a lobbyist for a “roster of clients [that] included pharmaceutical and insurance clients such as Novartis, Cigna and Blue Cross/Blue Shield,” a Reuters profile reveals. Janna isn’t the only member of the family who has profited from the private health insurance industry. Campaign finance records show that Ryan has received significant funds during the 2011–2012 cycle, raking in $81,850 from pharmaceuticals and $37,468 from HMOs — $65,650 of which came from healthcare-affiliated PACs. Ryan touts a Medicare plan that would expand the role of private insurers by replacing the traditional Medicare plan with a voucher program that seniors could use to purchase private health plans.


http://twitter.com/GiulioCoraggio/status/791376466827173888 How Twitter will shake up #insurance https://t.co/r0sejxzA0O #socialmedia

Google Decides to Shut-down its Comparison Service for Car Insurance, Credit Cards, and Mortgages

Because of failing Google’s Comparison mission, recently Google has decided to shut down its Comparison service for Car insurance, Credit cards, and Mortgages.
The objective of the administration, as indicated by Google, was to help clients look at car insurance or Visa offerings as fast and flawlessly as would be prudent. On account of car insurance, Google comparison service worked with national and nearby auto protection suppliers as a partner and would take a cut when somebody purchased protection online or by telephone, in view of an “adaptable expense per-obtaining model.”
On the other hand, Google Compare’s rival company known as the Zebra and its COO Joshua Dziabiak informed Business Insider on Monday that it has been whispering around his company from numerous industry sources that Google is going to shut down its Compare Auto Insurance service in the UK and USA as it has run since 2012. Joshua also added that “A lot of people aren’t super surprised” and “Some of us kind of saw it coming.”
“Despite people turning to Google for financial services information, the Google Compare service itself hasn’t driven the success we hoped for,” the company wrote to its partners, in an email obtained by Search Engine Land.
Furthermore, Dziabiak says that he doesn’t believe Google’s instrument did what’s needed to teach buyers about the complexities of the monetary administration past its value cites. He says that some car insurance transporters had been reluctant to take an interest with Google’s apparatus thus.

The move speaks to a misfortune to Google’s endeavors to grow its cash making benefits past its fortress of online inquiry and presentation promotions.
Dziabiak calls attention to that insurance promotions have a percentage of the most noteworthy expense per-click sums — implying that Google profits from them — so he theorizes that maybe the organization was seeing some cannibalization through Compare, since it would show up over those advertisements.
Moreover, Google sent an email to its partner and explained this “After a lot of careful consideration, we’ve decided that focusing more intently on AdWords and future innovations will enable us to provide fresh, comprehensive answers to Google users, and to provide our financial services partners with the best return on investment.”

McCain’s Insurance Deregulation Scheme Promises A Downward Spiral In Health Care Coverage
By Igor Volsky
Last night on CNN’s Larry King Live, Jamal Simmons, a supporter of Sen. Barack Obama (D-IL), argued that Sen. John McCain’s (R-AZ) health care plan would “do for the health care industry what the Republicans did for the credit card industry”:
Yes, what’s interesting about this and what we’re going to find out about John McCain is that John McCain was a neo-con before George Bush was a neo-con. He’s been friends with all these guys: Doug Feith, Bill Kristol, all these guys. You want to talk about health care? Johns McCain wants to do for the health care industry what the Republicans did for the credit card industry. They want to deregulate it and let people be able to choose their health care.
Watch It:

Indeed, as Robert Gordon, a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress Action Fund, argues in a recent Slate article, deregulation of the credit card industry “offers a cautionary tale about a little-understood provision at the center of John McCain’s health care plan.”
Following a pair of Supreme Court decisions which deregulated the banking industry, credit card companies relocated to states with no interest rate caps and charged “what they wanted” to borrowers in states with interest rate limits. McCain’s reform takes a similar tact. He would allow health insurers to operate across state lines “without complying with the laws in the state in which they operate,” and permit insurance plans from out-of-state to lure away healthier patients.
As Gordon points out, insurance companies “would have little incentive to continue doing business” under certain state rules which “require that companies issue coverage to all new customers and not set higher rates for people who are already sick”:
[Under legislation that McCain supports], insurers wouldn’t even need to pick up and move their operations; it would be enough to file some paperwork with a state insurance commissioner and pay that state’s relevant taxes…An insurer operating under Arizona law would be able to offer healthy New Yorkers a cheaper policy than an insurer working under New York law that has to price policies the same for everyone.
If the deregulated environment allows credit card companies to “use pricing practices, like teaser rates, to attract cash-strapped families and then…double or triple those rates without notice,” Gordon argues that McCain’s approach to deregulating the health insurance industry would similarly permit insurance companies to deny coverage to Americans with pre-existing conditions and “improve their own profits by offering targeted policies to people with the fewest health expenses”:
As with the history of credit cards, it’s Robin Hood in reverse. Apart from the obvious injustice, this approach could add to spiraling health costs. The sickest 10 percent of Americans are already responsible for 70 percent of the nation’s health expenses. When more such Americans go uninsured, skip checkups, and land in the emergency room, they end up costing taxpayers more.
Pre-existing conditions are not confined to chronic diseases. In fact, some individual insurance companies do not count a C-section as a pre-existing condition, and policies differ based on state laws and regulations. Under McCain’s proposal to free insurance companies from state regulations, insurers that continue to extend coverage to moms who have had a C-section would quickly find themselves at a competitive disadvantage with insurers that provide the least protection to new moms.
Thus, McCain’s deregulation scheme, like past banking reforms, seeks to extend industry profits, not consumer protections.

How Obamacare Is Trying To Make It Easier For Poor Americans To Pay For Their Health Insurance
By Sy Mukherjee

Officials overseeing the implementation of the Affordable Care Act have proposed rules to require that insurance companies accept a variety of payment methods, including cashier’s checks, money orders, and re-loadable pre-paid debit cards. That’s expected to help millions of low-income Americans — many of whom don’t have access to credit cards and checking accounts — who will receive federal tax credits to purchase insurance through Obamacare’s statewide marketplaces.
The health law extends premium subsidies to American households making up to 400 percent of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL), or about $94,200 for a family of four.
But many of the people gaining insurance through Obamacare’s marketplaces will be relatively poor, since higher-paying jobs tend to come with employer-sponsored health coverage. That could wind up being a problem when they try to pay their monthly premium under the law, because a large number of lower-income people don’t have checking accounts or do business with banks, despite the increasingly electronic nature of money transfers.
CNNMoney reports that 10 million U.S. households don’t have bank accounts at all, and according to one study cited by Kaiser Health News, one in four Americans who will qualify for premium subsidies through the health law don’t have checking accounts or a credit card.
These Americans have to rely on the sort of alternative payment methods that federal officials are now encouraging. Critics may point out that some of these methods — particularly debit card transaction — carry transaction fees, and could lead insurers to pass the cost of those charges onto low-income Americans.
But as Kaiser Health News notes, another Obamacare consumer protection will shield consumers from potential price gouging by insurers: the so-called “80/20 rule” that requires individual and small group health plans to spend at least 80 percent of the premiums they charge Americans on actual health care, rather than administrative overhead or profit. Card transaction fees are considered to be administrative, meaning that insurers would have to include those costs as part of their 20 percent overhead limit.

Insurance CEO Praises Affordable Care Act: ‘It Has Been A Pretty Good Thing’
By Igor Volsky

Aetna CEO, Chairman and President Mark Bertolini praised the Affordable Care Act during the HIMSS12 Conference in Las Vegas this week, arguing that while the new law and its regulations have “pulled [the insurance industry] through the crucible” and “reshaped” the health care market, “For most of what has already been implemented, it has been a pretty good thing”:
So what will the health insurers look like in the future? Bertolini offered a strong endorsement of the accountable health organization model, positioning health insurers as uniquely suited to usher in an era of coordinated care. “We need to move the system from underwriting risk to managing populations,” he said. “We want to have a different relationship with the providers, physicians and the hospitals we do business with.” […]
Pondering the future of the health care exchanges, Bertolini foresees the brands of health systems superceding those of health insurers. “We want to leverage or technologies and capabilities to allow you to be the face in marketplace,” he said.
Indeed, Bertolini says this new arrangement makes great sense from the perspective of the customer. The lack of coordination inherent in the current system stems largely from the various stakeholders acting rationally in their own self-interest. “For the patient it’s a nightmare. Think of a hockey game where everybody has their own puck.”
The Aetna chief also “discounted the prospect that the results of the 2012 presidential election or a Supreme Court decision striking down aspects of the ACA would deter the change,” noting, “Reform is not going to stop. It won’t go away.”
Insurers have generally accepted the inevitability of the ACA and have worked to shape its implementation to meet their needs. For instance, health lobbyists are pressuring Congress to repeal taxes on the industry, and have urged the Department of Health and Human Services to adopt exchange regulations that would allow almost all private insurers to participate in the new marketplaces and provide greater leeway for plans to design the standard essential health benefits package that will be offered in 2014. Insurers have also lobbied conservative governors to establish health care exchanges.
At the same time, the industry is preparing for the expansion of new customers. Last September, Cigna — one of the nation’s largest health insurers — kicked off a $25 million ad campaign designed to attract the individual consumers who will begin shopping for their own policies and the industry joined forces with health care and consumer groups to form the “Enroll America” campaign, an effort to “encourage states to make it easy for people to sign up for coverage, by providing model regulations” and “get the word out among the uninsured, through advertising and community outreach.”


4 Reasons You Need Career Fire Insurance In 2017
Hello, I hope this finds you well & prosperous this new year! Odds are your career is important to you or you would not have opened this article. My career is important to me as well but it’s not only my career that’s important to me, it’s the careers of those I care about. Over the past several years I have observed co-workers, trusted colleagues, friends and family suffer unexpected career setbacks. I myself have experienced it first-hand as well. I’ve observed and experienced the full spectrum of human emotion as I processed my way through and counseled my friends through some very difficult times. People’s careers are the primary vehicle they use to care for their families and when anything disrupts this career it directly impacts their ability and duty to provide. It’s never ‘just business’ for those on the chopping block.
However, the uncomfortable truth for many, and the greater principle I’m getting at in this article, is the concept of Career Insurance and how you need to 1) acknowledge the risk that is ever present and 2) plan accordingly. Gone are the days when you find a good company, work there for 30 years, retire after collecting your gold watch & then sit in your rocking chair. With all due respect to the older generations who built this country: That’s a broken model leaving people who still believe in it in for a nasty surprise.
There is no more job security. Unless you control the market, the industry or the economy you have no job security. Your best bet is to acknowledge the risk and seek to mitigate it. No degree, no job history, no super-secret skill-set will save you from the following 4 reasons why your job is never secure. Ever.
Easily read the rest on LinkedIn HERE!

Universal Catastrophic Insurance?
By Matthew Yglesias

JacobLyles asks: “What do you think of McArdle’s idea of universal catastrophic coverage? Relatively affordable and universal.”
Short answer: I think that’d be great.
Long answer: I’m not a believer in the “here’s this other idea of mine that’s good & since it’s good that’s a good reason to oppose Obama’s health care plan” theory of evaluating legislation. A bill that would have Medicare provide catastrophic coverage to all Americans would be a good bill. The House health care bill is also a good bill. The Senate health care bill is another good bill. And the administration outline is is yet another good bill.
Back in the winter of 2008–2009 if Max Baucus had asked me what I thought he should do, I would have said he should abandon hopes of a bipartisan, regular-order, comprehensive bill and advised him to draft a series of narrower proposals that can pass under reconciliation rules. Something along the lines of this universal catastrophic coverage idea would have been a good candidate. The Obama/Baucus theory of getting comprehensive legislation done struck me as doomed to failure. I think the odds are that my skepticism will be vindicated, but there’s still a very good chance that I’ll be proven wrong.
It’s important to note, though, that even though some pundits who I imagine usually vote GOP support universal catastrophic insurance that there’s no way actual Republican Party politicians would back the tax increases that would be needed to pay for it. John Kerry had a proposal in the 2004 campaign that was more-or-less along these lines and it was attacked as a budget-busting, tax-raising, socialistic government takeover of the health care system.

Insurance Coverage For Medical Cannabis

I read an article in the National Memo describing how judges are beginning to issue orders regarding insurance coverage for prescription medical cannabis. It’s interesting that the rest of the world moves on while the Federal Government digs its head further into the sand on this issue. The rollout of cannabis legalization in states like Oregon has had mixed results. Colorado seems to have figured out the process even with the banking issues but I don’t live there so I don’t really know first hand what patients experience in their state. Washington State apparently has its own set of problems.
The Oregon legislature, on the other hand, decided to rewrite the law that we voted into place so that what we have now doesn’t exactly resemble that original measure. People invested in land to grow cannabis only to discover that the legislature voted to allow areas to ban such grows if they so desired instead of allowing the original law to stand as written. The original law allowed for that possibility but by a citizen vote every two years and not by city governments. It wasn’t the best situation to invest your money in given a potential ban written into the law as far as I was concerned, but at least cannabis growers would have some time to get started. But with the legislative changes how many growers were dead in the water after investing everything they had?
Retail outlets are only now opening with dispensaries fulfilling their role in the interim creating potential headaches for patients. A report was issued to the committee governing cannabis in our state regarding the black market aspect that still exists and of course, the blame was placed on medical growers going rogue. Never mind the position the Oregon Legislature has put everyone in, growers, patients, business owners alike, by changes we didn’t vote for and the over-regulation of everything. It’s the medical growers. Right.
Many cannabis users become excited at the thought of legalization without realizing the problems it creates. We’re essentially asking for a plant to be legalized that should have never been criminalized in the first place. By legalizing, we validate what the government did all those years ago instead of standing firm on the truth that cannabis is safe to use in whatever manner an individual chooses.
Hemp was made illegal at the same time as cannabis which was ridiculous at best but made the cotton and paper products industries happy. Paper should be made from trees and clothing should be made from cotton. Hemp could be processed into fuel or into manufacturing supplies of all kinds, but the federal government decided that it was better to protect some business owners over hemp farmers. Instead of using corn which strips the soil of its nutrients in the production of gasoline, hemp could be used, a better option given it actually nourishes the soil where it grows. But, no.
Although medical cannabis is expensive to buy in dispensaries, and insurance companies covering medicinal cannabis would go far to defray that cost, in truth, cannabis should be readily available in all forms in the produce department as well as the organic food and supplement section of your local grocery store. We shouldn’t need a prescription that needs to be reimbursed by an insurance company in the first place.
Cannabis should be freely grown, purchased or used by anyone who wants it with no restrictions whatsoever. Again, doing anything else validates and gives cover to the government’s initial decision to criminalize a plant that was safe and part of our country’s pharmacopeia. They lied. It’s as simple as that. And people have gone to prison for that lie and suffered from ill health when they could have used a herb that was safe.
The current Attorney General is as backward on the issue as he could possibly be and it’s difficult to believe any sane policies will emerge from his office. But as insurance companies may find, until a judge determines that the cannabis laws are unconstitutional, they along with the rest of us will have to put up with federal and state controls that get us nowhere.
References:

Originally published at www.imsteppingaside.com on March 20, 2017.


6 Must-Know Facts About Homeowners Insurance
By: Jessica Ozar
Whether you rent or own, you should have insurance. As a homeowner, your mortgage lender will require you to have insurance, though you are not obligated as a renter unless your landlord requires it in your lease.
Like other types of insurance, home insurance protects against the things we don’t want to think about. With crime, fire, and water damage; accidental injuries; and some natural disasters, home insurance will cover the cost to replace personal items, cover medical bills if someone is injured in your home, and repair physical damage to the structure.
However, it does not cover all situations. If your home is damaged in an earthquake or hurricane, from water from a sewer backup or a major flood, or due to poor workmanship, you tend to be responsible for the costs to repair.
With any sort of insurance, you have options. Different companies offer varying policies. If you want to choose a good policy and make sure you save money in the process, you’ll want to follow these tips:
Shop Around
There are many companies that offer home insurance: Plymouth, StateFarm, MetLife, Nationwide, Liberty Mutual, Farmers Insurance, AllState, and Travelers, just to name a few.
While most places will have similar policies, you should shop around and see who has good discounts and who you feel comfortable with.
You may want to use a local agent to help, and while we millennials prefer to do everything online, it will really help to talk with different insurance companies to get a feel for their policies and customer service.
Differences in Policies
When you’re shopping, ask your agent whether your policy covers actual cash value or replacement cash value. If you need to file a claim, this point will be important to the amount of assistance your policy will provide.
Actual cash value refers to the cost of an item with depreciation. For example, if your Apple MacBook is six years old and it gets stolen from your home, you would be entitled to the cost of the computer when it was taken.
However, with a policy that provides replacement cash value, you would be able to submit for the cost to replace the computer when you buy a new one. That could mean the difference of $500!
Homeowners Discounts
Once you choose an insurer, there are many things you can do to reduce your monthly premiums. If you have both auto and home insurance, you tend to get a discount when you bundle your policies with the same company.
Additionally, telling your insurance company that you have an alarm system, working smoke detectors, deadbolts on your exterior doors, and a fire extinguisher will give additional discounts. Ask your agent what other discounts you may be eligible for. Having these things and being proactive in maintenance will reduce the likelihood that a major disaster will occur, as well. Your insurance company will trust that you are a good homeowner, too, which is helpful.
Having these things and being proactive in maintenance will reduce the likelihood that a major disaster will occur, as well. Your insurance company will trust that you are a good homeowner, too, which is helpful.
Check out CentSai.com to finish reading this article and to read other personal stories about finance.

Are you in High School or College? Check out CentsaiAdulting.com to read articles, watch videos, and take quizzes on how to #adult in the real world!

Drought And Heat Waves Are Costing The Federal Government Billions In Crop Insurance Payouts

Extreme weather has cost the federal government billions in crop insurance payouts over the last few years, but according to a new report, certain farming practices have the potential to lower that amount in the future and prepare farmers for the effects of climate change.
According to the report, released Tuesday by the Natural Resources Defense Council, the Federal Crop Insurance Program paid out a record $17.3 billion in insurance claims to farmers in 2012, just one year after the program set a record at $10.8 billion in claims in 2011. Climate change played a large role in these historic payments — in 2012, 80 percent of all payments made by the FCIP were for farmers whose crops had been lost to heat, drought or high wind, according to the NRDC. Many Midwestern states were hit even harder by these impacts — in Illinois, 98 percent of FCIP payouts in 2012 were to farmers with losses from heat, drought or hot wind, along with 97 percent in Iowa and Indiana.
These extreme costs are why the NRDC says that the FCIP should provide incentives to American farmers who adopt climate-smart tactics on their farms. In their report, the NRDC argues that practices such as no-till farming, cover cropping and using water conservation practices when irrigating fields should be incentivized by the FCIP.
According to the report, in 2010, farmers who used no-till farming techniques were 30 percent less likely to receive loss compensation payments from the FCIP. And in 2012, corn farmers affected by the severe drought who used cover crops in the regions affected by the severe drought saw yields of 79 percent of regular crop yields, compared to 68 percent for farmers who didn’t use cover crops.
Cover cropping increases the amount of organic matter and moisture in the soil and helps prevent erosion, so it’s helpful in both drought and heavy rains, and no-till farming has similar benefits. But the practices don’t just help protect farmers’ crops from extreme weather. Gabe Brown, a Great Plains farmer and advocate of cover crops and other soil health measures, said on an NRDC press call that cover cropping has increased the yields of his corn crop and decreased his costs. Brown said cover cropping and no-till practices allow him to avoid all synthetic pesticides or fertilizers and still harvest more than the average corn yield for his area.
“Corn can drop to $2 a bushel and I’m still going to make money. There’s not many producers across the country that can say that,” he said. “But the only reason I’m able to do that is that I’m focused on regenerating the soil resource.”
Right now, the FCIP doesn’t incentivize climate-smart behavior for farmers, unlike car insurance companies that incentivize safe driving or home insurance companies who offer discounts to homeowners who install security systems. As the report notes, the FCIP “actually tends to encourage farmers to make riskier choices, such as planting crops on fields that are not well-suited to agricultural production, because farmers who do so pay disproportionately low premium rates.” The NRDC recommends in its report that FCIP start a pilot program that reduces premium rates for farmers who adopt measures like no-till farming, a proposal it plans to take to the USDA.
Though the 2012 drought has let up in many parts of the country, some areas are still struggling with extreme weather and its negative effect on crops. Much of the West is still experiencing droughts, and in parts of the South, an area that has experienced record rainfall this summer, heavy rains are destroying crops like watermelons, peaches and wheat. And with climate change expected to increase drought in some regions and heavy rains in others, the effects of extreme weather on farming aren’t likely to let up soon.

Wage Insurance for Job Loss — Not a Silver Bullet
By Andy Stettner

This post originally appeared on TCF’s blog.
During last week’s State of the Union address, President Obama stated his intention to introduce a comprehensive plan to modernize the jobless safety net, and on Saturday, he used his weekly radio address to release the details of the plan.
The most provocative of the president’s proposals is wage insurance. Wage insurance addresses the painful and plain reality that many jobless workers take a pay cut when they go back to work. The president’s wage insurance program would make up a part of the difference between the old salary and the new lower reemployment wage, through a government-funded wage subsidy. The wage insurance proposal laid out in Saturday’s announcement would pay up to $10,000 over two years ($5,000 a year) and only be available to people earning less than $50,000 annually (for a period of at least three years) before they were laid off. For example a jobless worker whose wages are cut from $800 per week week to $400 per week would receive $200 per week in wage insurance.

Wage insurance plans were first touted by free trade advocates, justifying that “winners” in the economy should subsidize the “losers.” The first large-scale wage insurance program in the United States is included in the Trade Adjustment Assistance program (Reemployment Trade Adjustment Assistance, which is restricted to workers over the age of 50). This targeted group of individuals certainly deserve extra compensation for these losses.
But the recent surge in interest in wage insurance comes from a broader desire to address the scourge of long-term joblessness and get people to find jobs sooner. As I’ve written before, long-term unemployment reached epic levels during the the Great Recession, and even today, five years into a jobs recovery, the level of long-term unemployment is at levels never seen before. Of course, the fundamental cause is the lack of jobs — theHamilton project has indicated the nation is still 2.5 million jobs short of a jobs recovery. But having spoken to hundreds of jobless individual, my take is that an individual dynamic is also at play. Overwhelmingly, jobless individuals want to find employment that matches their old job in terms of pay and stature — and this is the main reason that a large share will hold out to the end of their unemployment benefits before going back to work at a lower paying job.
Evidence shows that being unemployed for long periods of time leads to labor market discrimination and worse outcomes. Getting back to work is vital. Wage insurance provides a potential salve — serving as an incentive to return to the labor market for lower pay. Ideally this gives people an “in” at a new company, or even a new line of work where they can advance to their prior wage.
This policy idea has common sense and bipartisan appeal. Why not pay people for being reemployed rather than unemployed?
There are reasons that worker advocates are skeptical. A fundamental tenet of unemployment insurance benefits is a little known protection called “suitable work.” Unemployment benefits recipients have the right to refuse job offers that the government or an employer might make if they are not reasonably fitted to their previous wage level, experience and skills. This stands in contrast to the “Work First” philosophy that for years drove welfare and workforce development policy, prioritizing job placement into any job with little regard for quality.
Wage insurance does not change suitable work requirements, but a cash incentive to take a lower-paying job is a new perspective for a program that has always felt more like insurance than a government handout. And, there is a risk that any large scale bipartisan wage insurance program would take resources from the core unemployment program, as early proponents proposed. At its worst, wage insurance can feel like a subsidy for a low-wage economy at a time when we most desperately need more government policies — such as raising the minimum wage and supporting the right to organize — to raise the quality of jobs. If employers should be accountable for paying their employees a liveable wage with good benefits, wage insurance offers them an out.
More importantly, research on wage insurance in North America has shown very inconsistent results. The first incarnation of wage insurance (reemployment bonuses) in the 1990s was predicated on the idea that the government could save money because jobless individuals receiving a subsidy would collect less in unemployment benefits. Plainly, that did not work — the cost of the program was larger than the savings from paying fewer weeks of joblessness with unemployment benefits.1 The Department of Labor commissioned a study released last week that found that “the evidence from rigorous evaluations of U.S. reemployment bonuses and the Canadian ESP, a combined wage supplement and wage insurance program, can be characterized as mixed. Measurable effects tended to be modest at best.” The administration points to a 4.4 percent increase in reemployment rates from Canada, which is meaningful but not groundbreaking.
Should wage insurance be pursued given these results? The participation in wage insurance among Trade Adjustment Assistance participants, which was 11 percent in 2014, up from less than 1 percent in 2011 — shows a demonstrable appetite for this kind of help, particularly among older individuals who have the hardest time getting back to work.
At best, this is how wage insurance should be seen — as one possible menu item among approaches to help laid off workers get back to work faster, not a panacea to address structural economic change. (TAA’s focus on the older workforce might be a better approach than the administration’s attention to the low-wage workforce.) To its credit the administration has included wage insurance as one of several items meant to increase reemployment, including work-sharing (providing UI subsidies to employers to keep workers on part-time rather than lay them off during a part-time downtown), making it easier for UI recipients to access training soon after they are laid off, and providing stepped-up career coaching to those who are unemployed.
Today, nearly 70 percent of jobless individuals find a job within three months of starting unemployment insurance. In other words, the system provides effective reemployment for millions of Americans — when workers can actually collect. The most important aspect of the president’s proposals are the ones that will get less attention — that is, a dramatically increased federal role in shoring up the bedrock unemployment insurance safety net system, which has been left mostly to the states. Those proposals include an enhanced federal role in making sure that unemployment insurance trust funds are rebuilt before the next recession, fixing remaining holes in program rules that exclude low-wage, women and part-time workers and making long overdue fixes to the federal-state extended benefits program (EB).
With the job market finally showing some positive drive, now would be the right time to make these kind of structural fixes to the unemployment insurance program. A well-structured wage insurance program is worth exploring for targeted populations, but should not be seen as a silver bullet to the problems of unemployment.
Notes
Bruce Meyer “Lessons from the U.S. Unemployment Insurance Experiments,” Journal of Economic Literature, Volume 33:1 (1995, March), p. 106.
Andy Stettner is a fellow at The Century Foundation where he researches and writes on labor policy.

Pseudo-science begets pseudo-insurance — and another phony attack on the IPCC is debunked
Climate change is the greatest risk facing the insurance industry
Climate change is a fact, and it is almost entirely made by man. It is jointly responsible for the rise in severe weather-related natural disasters, since the weather machine is “running in top gear”. The figures speak for themselves: according to data gathered by Munich Re, weather-related natural catastrophes have produced US$ 1,600bn in total losses since 1980, and climate change is definitely a significant contributing factor. We assume that the annual loss amount attributable to climate change is already in the low double-digit billion euro range. And the figure is bound to rise dramatically in future.
Those are the words of the CEO of Munich Re, the world’s largest reinsurer, in December. The anti-science crowd tries to shout down any talk of a link between climate change and extreme weather but even the loudest shouter told the journal Nature back in 2006, “Clearly since 1970 climate change (i.e., defined as by the IPCC to include all sources of change) has shaped the disaster loss record.” Indeed, that Nature article reported four years ago:
At a recent meeting of climate and insurance experts, delegates reached a cautious consensus: climate change is helping to drive the upward trend in catastrophes.
The evidence has only gotten stronger in recent years. A major study published in 2009, “Tropical cyclone losses in the USA and the impact of climate change “” A trend analysis based on data from a new approach to adjusting storm losses” concluded:
In the period 1971–2005, since the beginning of a trend towards increased intense cyclone activity, losses excluding socio-economic effects show an annual increase of 4% per annum. This increase must therefore be at least due to the impact of natural climate variability but, more likely than not, also due to anthropogenic forcings.
A 2009 NOAA-led report, Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States, identified a number of climate-related impacts that are occurring now and expected to increase in the future that could shape the disaster loss record:

Many phony charges are now being leveled at the IPCC because the anti-science crowd smells blood in the water, and many “journalists” are ready to repeat their nonsense (see “EXCLUSIVE: UN scientist refutes Daily Mail claim he said Himalayan glacier error was politically motivated.”
The newest phony charge came Sunday from another dubious source in the British press, “UN wrongly linked global warming to natural disasters.” But on Monday, the IPCC slammed the story as “misleading and baseless.” As the “IPCC statement on trends in disaster losses” explains:
The Sunday Times article gets the story wrong on two key points. The first is that it incorrectly assumes that a brief section on trends in economic losses from climate-related disasters is everything the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report (2007) has to say about changes in extremes and disasters. In fact, the Fourth Assessment Report reaches many important conclusions, at many locations in the report, about the role of climate change in extreme events. The assessment addresses both observations of past changes and projections of future changes in sectors ranging from heat waves and precipitation to wildfires. Each of these is a careful assessment of the available evidence, with a thorough consideration of the confidence with which each conclusion can be drawn.
The second problem with the article in the Sunday Times is its baseless attack on the section of the report on trends in economic losses from disasters. This section of the IPCC report is a balanced treatment of a complicated and important issue. It clearly makes the point that one study detected an increase in economic losses, corrected for values at risk, but that other studies have not detected such a trend. The tone is balanced, and the section contains many important qualifiers. In writing, reviewing, and editing this section, IPCC procedures were carefully followed to produce the policy-relevant assessment that is the IPCC mandate.
Kudos to the IPCC for responding to a trumped up charged quickly for once!
Chart: Climate-risk disclosure trends among U.S.- and non-U.S.-based insurance companies (Source: CDP data per Mills 2009)
Coincidentally, I already had a guest post in the works from one of the country’s leading experts on the connection between climate change and extreme weather and the impact on the insurance industry, Evan Mills. So, the rest of this post is Mills, a scientist at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, whom I have known for almost two decades. He is a true polymath (see “Building Commissioning: The Stealth Energy Efficiency Strategy”):
I had the pleasure of keynoting a meeting on climate change convened last month in San Francisco by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), the American Insurance Association (AIA), the Reinsurance Association of America (RAA), and Ceres. The speaker line-up included Fireman’s Fund, Prudential Capital Group, Deutsche Asset Management, CalPERS, Willis Re, Zurich Financial Services,Wells Fargo, NOAA’s National Climatic Data Center, NRDC, the California Department of Insurance, and several catastrophe modeling and environmental consultants. All spoke in unison about the risks and opportunities of climate change and the role that insurers and their regulators are increasingly playing in responding to it.
I argued in my presentation that climate change is the single greatest risk facing the insurance industry. Ernst & Young’s survey of 70 industry analysts seems to agree with me. As I’ve explained in Science, climate change is a systemic risk not unlike the banking crisis that blindsided almost everyone thanks in no small part to a nasty cocktail of undisclosed risks and wishful thinking. Astute insurers recognize a panoply of potential correlated losses triggered by climate change spanning the core business of underwriting (in almost every line of business, from property to life/health to liability), coupled with exposures through the assets in which they invest, topped off with with formidable collatoral reputational, regulatory, and competitive risks. A vanguard of insurers are responding with new products, services, and constructive engagement in public policy.
I also pointed out that insurer shareholders have emerged in force, most notably through the Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP), with members representing $55 trillion under management. Now, U.S. insurance regulators are asking insurers to proactively disclose their climate-risk assessment for the benefit of shareholders, customers, and, yes, even the insurers themselves.
During the Q&A period, Robert Detlefsen, from the National Association of Mutual Insurance Companies (NAMIC), asked to share a “comment” (which he emphasized was not a question) about my presentation. Detlefsen — formerly with Citizens for a Sound Economy and the Competitive Enterprise Institute — was displeased that I had not given more attention to the infamous CRU emails. I responded that I would be delighted to discuss the subject with him at length after the session. He elected not to take me up on this offer.
Pseudoscience appears to be more compelling to some than fact-based science or the pursuit of genuine understanding. Insurance based on pseudoscience risks deteriorating into pseudoinsurance.
A peculiar article by Evan Lehmann in the New York Times dredges up the stale CRU story (which has otherwise fizzled for lack of substance) and features Detlefsen’s distrust of science and distaste for climate risk disclosure, as summarized in a letter to his members’ regulators reiterating his concerns.
To the uninitiated reader, Lehmann’s piece might suggest that the entire insurance industry is questioning the veracity of climate science or the value of risk disclosure. What readers are left on their own to discover is that NAMIC — the trade organization featured as skeptical on climate change — “represents” but one branch of the industry (the mutual insurers). Two other insurance trade associations (AIA and RAA) not only co-hosted the summit but were actually on stage that day advancing a constructive discussion about how to get in front of the problem. Readers would also not have suspected that Detlefsen’s own organization sends a very different message through its excellent web portal on climate and insurance. Ironically, the insurance trade press has thus far given far more balanced treatment to these issues.
While Detlefsen characterizes the motivation of others in seeking climate-risk disclosure to regulators, shareholders, and customers as having “nakedly ideological ends,” over 100 insurance companies (approaching 70% of those asked) have somehow seen their way to replying to a voluntary climate risk disclosure process that has been conducted for years through CDP. They frequently find that the very process of assembling climate-disclosure documentation is constructive (not just a compliance exercise) and helps them think through the issues and better assess their risk and their progress towards managing that risk. Other U.S. insurance trade organizations have worked collaboratively to help craft the U.S. disclosure process. One of them, the American Insurance Association, is noted as being far more at peace with the regulators’ climate disclosure efforts than is NAMIC. Any observer would have to read quite a lot between the lines to support Detelfsen’s stipulation that that the regulators have any pre-determined expectations about the conclusions that insurers’ will reach through the disclosure process.
Climate skepticism among insurance trade associations like NAMIC is a more or less uniquely American phenomenon. Even then, some of NAMICs largest members””including household names like State Farm, Nationwide and Liberty Mutual “”have been accepting of the science and very proactive in identifying responses to climate-change risks. To my knowledge, none have retracted their previous statements based on the stolen emails.
Other U.S. insurance tradegroups do not share Detlefsen’s perspective. The Reinsurance Association of America engaged in the climate discussion 15 years ago, and recently issued a constructive and proactive climate change policy statement. The American Insurance Association has also been engaged for over a decade, including participation in international fora. The Association of Bermuda Insurers and Reinsurers issued a policy statement just before the Copenhagen meeting. These trade associations seem to believe that it is not only appropriate but also beneficial for themselves and the companies they represent to engage.
Although invoked by Detlefsen as a reason to scuttle the disclosure process, the “tempest in a thimble” brought on by the stolen emails has been debunked ad nauseum, including in a systematic third-party review by the Associated Press. [I cite the AP review only for those readers who don’t want to trust the scientific establishment for policing itself and reviewing the CRU issue formally.] Any substance that may remain does not change our fundamental scientific understanding of climate change. What Detlefsen desribes in his letter as my “intolerance for dissent” in finding no smoking gun in these emails, is more accurately characterized as my desire (and responsibility as a practicing scientist) to keep science fact-based. The factual inaccuracies that underpin the critics’ interpretation of these emails suggest either a very human tendancy to explain away bad news, profound technical incompetence, or sheer desperation in trying to delay addressing the risks. The interests of society (including those of insurers) are poorly served by sensationalized (and often non-fact-checked) reporting on peer-reviewed science. I would only add that questioning the findings of climate science based on non-expert interpretations of these emails is tantamount to discarding the very practice of scientific inquiry, while dismissing the judgment of hundreds of governments, business groups, and religious organizations that have scrutinized and accepted what mainstream science (and the Nobel Prize committee) has concluded about climate change since inquiry began over a century ago. From the Pentagon to the Supreme Court to the Vatican — human-induced climate change is accepted fact. This leaves precious little for holdouts to hang their hats on.
Chart: Climategate plot from Google/trends (Source: http://www.google.com/trends)
Many insurance companies can’t be bothered with foot-dragging. Through 2008, we documented nearly 643 specific activities on the part of 246 insurance entities from 29 countries (as well as 34 non-insurer collaborators). This represented a 50% year-over-year increase in the level of activity compared to that observed through 2007. These entities collectively earned $1.2 trillion in annual premiums that year (more than a quarter of the global total) and had $13 trillion in assets, while employing 2.2 million people.
Exasperated with the outcome in Copenhagen last month, the CEO of Munich Re (the world’s largest and most science-focused reinsurer) stated that:
“Climate change is a fact, and it is almost entirely made by man. It is jointly responsible for the rise in severe weather-related natural disasters, since the weather machine is “running in top gear”. The figures speak for themselves: according to data gathered by Munich Re, weather-related natural catastrophes have produced US$ 1,600bn in total losses since 1980, and climate change is definitely a significant contributing factor. We assume that the annual loss amount attributable to climate change is already in the low double-digit billion euro range. And the figure is bound to rise dramatically in future.”
To probe the internal consistency of Detlefsen’s hypothesis for a moment, even if climate change may not be happening, isn’t risk a product of uncertainty, and don’t insurers repeatedly tell us that “risk is our business”? And doesn’t selectively feeding on newspaper soundbites instead of thousands of peer-reviewed technical articles for climate intelligence invite myopia and risks of its own? Regulators””and insurance customers””expect a far higher level of due diligence. This is summed up well in a leading actuarial journal by the former corporate actuary and vice president of risk management for Nationwide Insurance — one of NAMIC’s largest members — and current chair of the Casualty Actuarial Society’s Climate Change Committee:
“For anyone attempting to move through the informational confusion on climate-change issues, the proliferation of counterfactual information makes the task daunting. Though the vast majority of climatologists support the global-warming theory, much of the media coverage gives approximately equal weight to the proponents of each side of the debate. … We need to recognize the likelihood that some climate changes are probable rather than improbable.”
Pretzel logic aside, foreword-looking insurers are adapting to a host of risks and opportunities. Technology and business practices are changing as fast as fast as the climate itself. This is already reshaping the demand for insurance. New risks will arise, e.g. those associated with carbon capture and storage, a revival of nuclear power, and geoengineering. Insurers that ignore this transition do so at their peril.
— Evan Mills
JR: Here are some related posts:
Australian Scientists: “there are indications that climate change has worsened this recent drought.”
The non-blizzard of 2009 and why the anti-science disinformers try to shout down any talk of a link between climate change and extreme weather

STUDY: Obamacare Has Given 3.4 Million Young Americans Access To Health Insurance
By Sy Mukherjee

According to a new Commonwealth Fund study published Friday, Obamacare has sharply reduced the number of young Americans lacking health coverage, reversing a decade-long trend that saw a rise in the ranks of the young and uninsured. The study also finds that uninsurance rates for Americans as a whole remained relatively unchanged, leading the authors to emphasize that full implementation of the Affordable Care Act will be critical to securing Americans’ health coverage.
The report, based on a biennial survey of Americans’ access to health insurance, found that adults aged 19 to 25 had seen their uninsurance rates fall “from 48 percent in 2010 to 41 percent in 2012, from 13.6 million [young adults] to 11.7 million — a decline of 1.9 million.” And those are just the numbers for a single year — since the health care law was passed in 2010, a full 3.4 million young Americans have become newly-insured. That represents a 10 percent upward swing in two years:

Researchers say that this positive development is almost entirely a consequence of Obamacare’s provision allowing adults up to age 26 to remain on their parents’ health plans. Still, 46 percent of all adults, or “an estimated 84 million people, did not have insurance for the full year or were underinsured and unprotected from high out-of-pocket costs” in 2012. Addressing these Americans’ high medical costs and lack of access to health insurance demonstrates the need to carefully implement the rest of the health care law, as highlighted by Obamacare’s success in providing young Americans with coverage.
But that could be difficult given conservative critics’ steadfast opposition to all things Obamacare, which is bolstered by the media’s predilection for pouncing on any potential problems with the law — regardless of whether or not such claims are housed in reality. In particular, GOP governors who remain reticent to take part in Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion could end up undermining reform by denying health benefits to some of America’s most vulnerable populations — and prevent the same kind of progress being seen with young adults from taking hold with U.S. adults at large.

Congresswoman Opposes Federal Law Preventing Insurance Companies From Denying Care To Leukemia Patients
By Adam Peck and Scott Keyes

TAMPA, Florida — There should be no federal law preventing insurance companies from denying coverage to leukemia patients, according to a leading Republican congresswoman.
In an interview with ThinkProgress, Rep. Marsha Blackburn (R-TN) argued that, contra Obamacare’s new protections, insurance companies should not be prevented by federal law from denying insurance to people with pre-existing conditions, including those with leukemia. “What you don’t have to do is federalize everything,” Blackburn, one of the GOP leaders in the health care fight, explained. She preferred state-run high-risk pools instead, but refused to entertain the idea that it should be illegal for insurance companies to deny care for those with pre-existing conditions.
KEYES: Should that be a federal law that insurance companies can’t deny insurance to, say, leukemia patients?
BLACKBURN: Republicans have for years worked on how to handle pre-existing conditions. Some of the states have state-run high-risk pools and those have been very successful. […]
KEYES: So you’re saying a state thing rather than a federal law?
BLACKBURN: Yeah. And when you look at the way some of these risk pools have been handled, they’ve been handled at the state level, some at the local level, but I think that you’ve got some models there for doing it. Not every good idea originates in Washington DC. […] There’s a different way to handle it.
KEYES: Rather than a one-size-fits-all law?
BLACKBURN: Handling pre-existing conditions, having something to handle that, was a Republican idea. What you don’t have to do is federalize everything. That’s what Democrats want to do. They want to bring it all into Washington D.C.
Listen to it:
SoundCloud Widget
Edit descriptionw.soundcloud.com
Blackburn isn’t the only one expressing this view. In June, Indiana Senate nominee Richard Mourdock (R) declared that businesses should be allowed to deny health insurance to cancer patients if they wanted. In an interview with ThinkProgress later that month, Sen. Ron Johnson (R-WI) echoed the same belief, arguing that employers should be permitted to deny insurance to cancer patients because “our nation was based on freedom.” In fact, 239 Republicans (and five Democrats) voted again last month to repeal the landmark health reform law that will make it illegal for insurance companies to deny coverage for people with pre-existing conditions.

Rockefeller: ‘The health insurance industry is the shark that sits right below the water.’
By Zaid Jilani
Today, the White House has been hosting the Bipartisan Health Care Summit, where “the one topic that Democrats keep hammering on over and over is the problem of insurance companies refusing to cover people with preexisting conditions.” For example, during the summit today, Sen. Jay Rockefeller (D-WV) ripped into the abusive behavior of insurance corporations, saying that the industry “is the shark that sits right below the water”:
ROCKEFELLER: The health insurance industry is the shark that swims just below the water and you don’t see that shark until you feel the teeth of that shark. … This is the way they operate. Nobody has any oversight over them. They’re not under any anti-trust rules. They can do what they want. … This is a rapacious industry that does what it wants.
Watch it:

The “rapacious” behavior that Rockefeller condemns includes raising premiums to increase their profits, denying coverage to women who have had Caesarean section pregnancies, and rescinding coverage of customers for frivolous reasons. Kevin Drum notes that Republican “have been relentlessly trying to talk about everything but this. They’ve barely acknowledged the preexisting conditions problem at all.”


5 Reasons Why Disability Insurance Is A Must
By: Tess Wicks
Take a second to think about your most important and valuable asset. Your car? Your engagement ring? Your collection of Beanie Babies from the 1990s? You missed the one asset that is greatly undervalued and often goes unprotected — your own ability to make an income.
I’m going to say that again, but differently…
Your ability to make money is your most important asset.
Earning a living drives everything we do. It even drives our ability to acquire more “valuable” assets. And what do we do for our most important assets? We protect them.
We insure our cars, we insure our homes, we insure our belongings–including our engagement rings–and we insure our health. And yet, so few people see the importance of insuring their income with disability insurance.
The Hard Truth
According to the U.S. Social Security Disability Program, 56 million Americans live with disabilities — that’s one in five. What’s more, one in four of our nation’s 20-year-olds insured for disability will become disabled before reaching retirement age.
How many of your peers are aware that they have a 25 percent chance of being disabled during their working lifetime? Probably none of them.
According to a study from the Council for Disability Awareness, more than 20 percent of workers under the age of 40 believe that they are more likely to win the lottery jackpot than become disabled.
The odds of winning the lottery jackpot are one in 259 million. Compare that with the odds of a 20-year-old becoming disabled before retirement. We’re a lot more vulnerable to injury and illness than we think, but we’re not doing much about it.
Sixty-one percent of people surveyed in a study conducted by Life Happens and LIMRAbelieve that most people need disability insurance. However, only 26 percent of them actually own disability insurance.
These uninsured individuals who become disabled will have to rely on personal savings to keep themselves — and possibly their entire family — afloat. Their savings will have to be enough to cover regular living expenses, plus additional costs related to their disability.
Sadly, only 45 percent of Americans could fund a three-month financial disruption using money from an emergency fund, according to a report conducted by the Federal Reserve.
And 47 percent of Americans would find it difficult to cover an expense of $400 without using some form of borrowed money.
The Solution: Get Covered
We know that not everyone has access to disability coverage through their employer. If you do, this is the most affordable way to cover your greatest asset. But if you don’t, it’s still possible to protect your income.
Let’s look at your options:
Short-Term Disability
Short-term disability (STD) provides salary protection — often up to 80 percent of salary — for employees who have a qualifying illness or injury and are unable to return to work. After a short waiting period of up to 14 days, the disabled employee could receive coverage over the course of two weeks to two years, depending on their plan.
Short-term disability can cover a prolonged illness, the birth of a child, or an injury that impacts one’s ability to work.
Check out CentSai.com to finish reading this article and to read other personal stories about finance.

Are you in High School or College? Check out CentsaiAdulting.com to read articles, watch videos, and take quizzes on how to #adult in the real world!

Zenefits Officially Responds to Utah Insurance Department
The Utah Insurance Department’s ruling is unsupported by the facts and Utah law.

Zenefits, the San Francisco-based online HR platform company, has officially responded to the Utah Insurance Department’s recent letter banning the company from the Beehive State.
Written by Zenefits’ attorney, Thomas J. Welsh, the letter begins by referring to a notice the company received on November 20th that stated the company’s business model is illegal in Utah because it induces the purchase of insurance.
“Not only is this conclusion unsupported by the facts or law, it sets Utah apart from every other state in the Union, to the detriment of its business environment and its consumers,” writes Welsh. “It sends the clear message that Utah insurance regulators are hostile to innovation, and that insurers and brokers in Utah run the risk of prosecution if they deviate from regulators’ subjective opinions of how they should operate.”
When Beehive Startups first wrote about Zenefits getting kicked out of Utah, we noted that the “Utah Insurance Department’s decision could potentially have devastating implications on Utah’s future as a technology hub. By forcing Zenefits to shutdown or add an extra surcharge to all of its Utah customers, the state is claiming the availability of free online software — even if generally available to the public — is unfair competition.”
Welsh seemed to reach a similar conclusion in the company’s official response to the Utah Insurance Department:
The Department’s determination will also have ripple effects beyond the insurance marketplace, pegging the State as inhospitable to companies that use technology and innovation to reach new markets or disrupt existing ones. When regulators prefer to interpret statutes in a way that assumes the illegality of new business models, particularly when a fair reading of the statute requires the contrary result, innovative companies will invariably conclude that doing business in Utah isn’t worth having to fight the preference for the status quo. The Department’s decision is the equivalent of planting a sign at the state line that says, “Innovation Not Welcome.”
Utah Gov. Gary Herbert and Lt. Gov. Spencer Cox initially responded to their Insurance Department’s decision by suggesting it was up to the Utah State Legislature to change the law, and that Insurance Commissioner Todd Kiser was just enforcing existing law.
In a blog post published this morning on the company’s website, Zenefits CEO Parker Conrad disagreed with that conclusion.
“As we note in our response, the Insurance Department’s ruling is ‘unsupported by the facts and Utah law,’ and it ‘sends clear message that Utah insurance regulators are hostile to innovation,’” wrote Conrad. “The ruling ignores how Zenefits’ business actually works, and misinterprets Utah law — including the intent of the authors of the specific Utah law allegedly violated. We believe that by shutting down Zenefits to protect incumbent brokers, the Insurance department is also violating federal competition laws — and is unconstitutionally interfering with interstate commerce since, in the words of our memo, it ‘has no rational connection to the state’s interest in protecting consumers.’”
Zenefits’ entire letter to the Utah Insurance Department can be found at the bottom of this post. We’ll continue to follow this story as it develops.
Update: Marty Carpenter, spokesman for Gov. Herbert, issued the following statement regarding our story on the recent Zenefits’ response:
“The governor has said he is willing to work with all stakeholders to ensure Utah has the right policy in place to embrace innovative ideas while protecting consumers. As an administration, we understand Zenefits’ frustration and we are actively working toward a resolution in the upcoming legislative session. However, changing statute is something we strive to do with complete information. Ultimately, if we determine the law needs to be changed to benefit the people of our state, we are open to changing the law.”
Zenefits Responds to Utah
Zenefits Responds to Utah
Zenefits Responds to Utah - Free download as PDF File (.pdf), Text File (.txt) or read online for free. Zenefits has…www.scribd.com
Published 12/16/2014

IRS Commissioner Debunks GOP Fear-Mongering: We Won’t Audit People To Check Health Insurance Status
By Amanda Terkel
Now that health care reform is law, conservatives have come up with a new line of attack to scare the American public: The IRS will be tracking you down if you don’t purchase health insurance. Rep. Kevin Brady (R-TX) fueled the scare in a March 18 press release, announcing the findings of a study by Republican Hill staff:
A new analysis by the Joint Economic Committee and the House Ways & Means Committee minority staff estimates up to 16,500 new IRS personnel will be needed to collect, examine and audit new tax information mandated on families and small businesses in the ‘reconciliation’ bill being taken up by the U.S. House of Representatives this weekend.
“When most people think of health care reform they think of more doctors exams, not more IRS exams,” says U.S. Congressman Kevin Brady, the top House Republican on the Joint Economic Committee. “Isn’t the federal government already intruding enough into our lives? We need thousands of new doctors and nurses in America, not thousands more IRS agents.”
This news quickly spread to conservative media outlets, which hyperbolized the claim with statements like: the “IRS will now oversee health control and determine whether you are compliant,” and the IRS will now be responsible “for finding and punishing those who don’t” have “acceptable” health insurance. An article on the Daily Caller published an article headlined “IRS looking to hire thousands of tax agents to enforce health care laws” accompanied by a picture of armed soldiers.
Yesterday during a House Ways and Means Committee hearing, IRS Commissioner Doug Shulman made clear that all these claims are nothing but misinformation. He said that, essentially, Brady’s analysis was premature because the IRS is still figuring out the resources it will need “to implement the tax provisions” in the health care legislation. He also completely refuted the notion that IRS agents would be going after people to see if they have acceptable health care:
REP. RON KIND (D-WI): And IRS agents are not going to go out and auditing taxpayers to verify if they have obtained acceptable health insurance, will they?
SHULMAN: No. … [I]t’s probably worth me being very clear because I think there have been some misconceptions out there. The way we envision this working is that HHS, the Department of Health and Human Services, and the exchanges will be working with the insurance companies to determine what is acceptable coverage.
All that will happen with the IRS is similar to a current 1099 where a bank sends IRS a statement that says “here’s the interest” someone owes, and they send it to the taxpayer. We expect to get a simple form — that we won’t look behind — that says this person has acceptable health coverage. There are not going to be any discussions about health coverage with an IRS employee.
Shulman added that the role of the IRS is going to be “the tax portions of this, not the health portions of this,” including helping educate individuals and businesses learn about the tax incentives they qualify for. Watch it:

Transcript:
KIND: Dr. Boustany raised the issue of the health reform bill and I think there is a lot of misinformation, a lot of misperception, about the role that IRS will play in the implementation of the recently passed health care bill.
So let me ask you a series of questions and as much as you can just answer them yes or no to clarify some questions that I have about the exact role that the IRS will play.
The health care bill that was just signed by the President will not fundamentally alter the relationship between the IRS with the American taxpayer, will it?
SHULMAN: No.
KIND: You said that right now you are moving forward doing calculations of costs and staffing needs that the IRS has but you haven’t made any of those final determinations yet, have you?
SHULMAN: That is correct.
KIND: And IRS agents are not going to go out and auditing taxpayers to verify if they have obtained acceptable health insurance, will they?
SHULMAN: No.
KIND: In fact, it’s going to be the insurance companies that will merely be certifying whether or not an individual has obtained health care coverage, and they’ll be certifying that to the IRS?
SHULMAN: Yes, it’s probably worth me being very clear because I think there have been some misconceptions out there. The way we envision this working is that HHS, the Department of Health and Human Services, and the exchanges will be working with the insurance companies to determine what is acceptable coverage.
All that will happen with the IRS is similar to a current 1099 where a bank sends IRS a statement that says “here’s the interest” someone owes, and they send it to the taxpayer. We expect to get a simple form — that we won’t look behind — that says this person has acceptable health coverage. There are not going to be any discussions about health coverage with an IRS employee.
KIND: In fact, I would envision that the major role the IRS will play is trying to get information into the individuals’ hands and businesses about the various tax incentives that the health reform bill has, and how they can best access those incentives and utilize them, is that right?
SHULMAN: Yes, I mean, the role of the IRS is going to be again, the tax portions of this, not the health portions of this, and what we’re going to try to do is make sure that people are educated, there’s information, we process payments quickly. We also will make sure there is no fraud and abuse in the system as we always do.
KIND: So the IRS is still going to pick up the phone and answer questions in regards to the tax incentives in the health care bill?
SHULMAN: Yes.
KIND: I assume that the IRS will try to build some type of online education service too for people to access as far as what they’re eligible for?
SHULMAN: Absolutely.
KIND: And that you will probably be performing some additional outreach services with businesses and taxpayers about the health care bill?
SHULMAN: Absolutely.
KIND: And as you indicated earlier to Mr. Etheridge, you are already moving forward on a 35 percent tax credit that small businesses are going to be getting this year already with enactment of the health care bill?
SHULMAN: That’s our first move.
KIND: And no taxpayer is going to be subject to any IRS liens or levies, or jail time, for failing to disclose insurance requirements to the IRS?
SHULMAN: That is what the legislation calls for, yes.
KIND: And as soon as your internal review is done, I assume you’re going to report back to Congress what type of resources you’ll need for staffing or for additional funds in order to implement the health care bill?
SHULMAN: Yes, I do want to be clear as I was with Mr. Boustany, we will need resources to implement the tax provisions in this legislation and we will look forward to working with Committee to make sure we have the proper resources to serve the American people.

Last Year, Nearly 13 Million Women Of Reproductive Age Didn’t Have Health Insurance
CREDIT: Shutterstock
Almost 13 million American women between the ages of 15 and 44 didn’t have health insurance in 2012, according to a new analysis from the Guttmacher Institute. When that demographic is broken down by economic status, nearly one in four women living below the poverty line didn’t have health care that year.
That’s especially problematic because uninsured women in that age group may not have any way to access affordable family planning services — especially if they’re living in poverty. Over the past decade, unintended pregnancies have become increasingly concentrated among low-income women who can’t afford birth control. The United States also has some of the highest rates of teen pregnancies and first-day infant deaths in the developed world, and women’s health experts say that’s largely due to the gaps in access to family planning services.
“These bleak statistics not only underscore the urgent and ongoing need for safety-net programs such as the Title X national family planning program, they also demonstrate the significant potential gains to be made as the Affordable Care Act’s expansion of public and private insurance coverage gets underway,” the Guttmacher researchers note.
Fortunately, several key components of the Affordable Care Act will ensure that women have better access to health insurance in the coming year. Obamacare will extend coverage to additional low-income Americans through its state-level expansion of the Medicaid program, as well as give federal subsidies to uninsured Americans to help them purchase plans on new insurance marketplaces.
And once more women gain insurance, they’ll also have better benefits to suit their reproductive needs. Obamacare requires insurers to cover a range of gender-specific preventative services — like contraception, cancer screenings, HPV vaccinations, maternity care, and well-woman check ups — at no additional charge. The health law’s birth control provision has been in place for a little over a year by now, and an estimated 27 million women are already benefiting from it.
Without Obamacare, the cost barriers to contraception can be prohibitive for many women. One study conducted in 2012 found that nearly half of young women admitted they hadn’t used their birth control method as directed in order to cut down on expenses. And the most effective forms of long-lasting contraception were out of reach for many women because they can cost hundreds of dollars out of pocket. Problematically, birth control can actually be more expensive in low-income areas.
But even as the federal health reform law is making big gains in this area, that’s not necessarily the case when it comes to state policies. State-level family planning programs have been subject to huge cuts in recent years, as Republican lawmakers have slashed women’s health funding in at least ten different states.

Going Without Health Insurance

Did you find yourself looking at the health care exchanges and decide to remain uninsured and pay the penalty of $95 or more because the costs of the plans didn’t fit into your budget, or you were turned off by the high deductible plans you could afford? The Times looks at those who have made a decision to skip health insurance and go without:
Heidi Reinberg, 53, a freelance documentary producer who lives in Brooklyn, said she had gone uninsured for most of her adult life and had managed just fine.
She did check out her options through New York’s marketplace but said she was not impressed. She did not qualify for a subsidy based on her 2013 income, she said, and was particularly put off by the high deductibles on many of the plans available to her.
With an income that fluctuates unpredictably, she said that she could not justify a new expense for something that was “not a priority.”
“It doesn’t scare me not to have it,” said Ms. Reinberg, adding that she exercised, ate healthily and rarely got sick. “I’d rather pay down my credit cards than take on another bill for something I don’t know that I’m going to need.”
Like Reinberg, I exercise, eat healthy, and rarely get sick these days. Unlike Reinberg, I have had to be hospitalized before many years ago, so it does scare me not to have it. I initially got a plan through the New York health care exchange, but am switching to a new plan through another job I have.
What about you? Did you get a plan through the health care exchanges?
Photo: Philip Choi


Optimizing Health Insurance Claims Processing Through Data Analytics:
How a US-based non-profit health insurance corporation improved their claim processing operations and saved money thanks to data analytics.
Originally published on Tumblr

Tom Brady Says Hey to Insurance Salesmen
Whoa: Tom Brady recalling the day he was drafted is worth a watch for a number of reasons. (The least-interesting of which being — is his dad Locke’s dad from Lost?)

Texas Medicaid Director: 91 Percent Of Texans Will Have Insurance If State Implements Obamacare
By Igor Volsky
Texas Republicans are taking a hardline against implementing the exchanges in the Affordable Care Act and currently have “no plans to implement an exchange” in the state. But during a House Public Health and Insurance Committees hearing yesterday, Billy Millwee, the State Medicad Director told lawmakers that “the percentage of Texans with health insurance will increase to 91 percent — up from 74 percent today — after the national health care law takes effect in 2014.” Texas — which has the highest rate of uninsured Americans — has the most to gain from implementing the law.

I agree. I think the biggest thing holding it back is insurance corporations are making too much money off us and too many people are sucking at that teat. I addressed that.
I’m mailing off the letters. Let’s see who responds and how.

Major Banks Allegedly Engaged In $6 Billion Mortgage Insurance Kickback Scheme
By Pat Garofalo
American Banker reports that “many of the country’s largest banks received $6 billion in kickbacks from mortgage insurers over the course of a decade, according to a previously undisclosed investigation by the Inspector General of the Department of Housing and Urban Development.” Major mortgage lenders, including Citigroup and Wells Fargo, allegedly demanded that insurers “cut them in on the lucrative business of insuring the mortgages they produced during the housing boom,” when subprime predatory lending exploded out of control. Such a scheme potentially violates the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act, a 1974 law prohibiting abusive home sales. The charges have been referred to the Department of Justice.


http://twitter.com/GiulioCoraggio/status/803840980600455168 #BigData, big opportunities for #insurance https://t.co/5BrIT3lN8H

A Story About Chemo, Insurance And Moms
Here’s a fine how-do-you-do: “My mom received an $800 bill for one session of chemo the other day in the mail that said her insurance wasn’t going to cover the treatment due to ‘a lack of information.’”


http://twitter.com/GiulioCoraggio/status/796102547165630466 #Blockchain: An #insurance focus https://t.co/eASgyg8X5b

Steve King Claims Health Insurance Regulations Violate The Constitution

Rep. Steve King (R-IA) has always had a loose relationship with the Constitution — his flagship proposal is a wildly unconstitutional bill stripping many Americans of their citizenship. Today, however, he took his belief that he alone has the power to rewrite the Constitution to a new level, telling right-wing talk show host G. Gordon Liddy that entirely uncontroversial insurance regulations violate the Constitution:
First of all [the Affordable Care Act] is unconstitutional. We can go through all of that component, Gordon, but, in the end, this trade off of giving up our personal decisions on what health insurance policy we choose to buy, what health insurance policy will be delivered to us because of market demands, and making decisions on doctors and tests and second opinions, as a whole list of things that are taken away from us under Obamacare. All of that, for what? So that we have a federal mandate that children must stay on our insurance until age 26? I want mine to grow up, as a matter of fact.
And then, going on down the line, preexisting conditions, the states can address that constitutionally far better than the federal government, and that’s how it should be addressed.
Listen:
It’s clear from King’s error-laden rant against the Affordable Care Act that he hasn’t actually read the bill. Among other things, the law does not “mandate” that children must stay on their parents insurance until age 26. The law gives young adults the option of remaining on their parents insurance, but leaves them perfectly free to choose another insurance provider.
King’s reading of the Constitution is even more off base. While a number of litigants have filed meritless lawsuits falsely claiming that Congress cannot require people to either carry insurance or pay slightly more income taxes, even Speaker John Boehner (R-OH) concedes that the Act’s provision forbidding insurers from discriminating against people with preexisting conditions “fall[s] within Congress’s power, pursuant to the Commerce Clause, to regulate the interstate health insurance market.” If King’s position were ever adopted by the Supreme Court, it would mean that the entire insurance industry would be immune from federal regulation.
And that’s the least of the problems with King’s argument. King’s core argument — that only the states and not the federal government are allowed to regulate a national market — is straight out of the tenther playbook. Sen. Mike Lee (R-UT) recently made an identical argument to claim that federal child labor laws are unconstitutional, and Sen. Rand Paul (R-KY) also adopted King’s theory of the Constitution to claim that the federal ban on whites-only lunch counters must be tossed out.
Ironically, King’s amateurish foray into constitutional law comes on the same day that over 100 actual legal scholars signed a letter rejecting the absurd view that the Affordable Care Act violates the Constitution. As they explain, the only way to strike down the law is to “jettison nearly two centuries of settled constitutional law.” If King were smart, he would consider consulting with one of them before he exposes his constitutional ignorance once again on a national broadcast.

Thing I Do Right: Have Health Insurance

Sometimes even people who don’t do very many things right do things right. What do you do right? Here’s a thing I do right.
I’m bad with money, hardy har har har, but: I’m not bad at everything. It’s important to give ourselves credit for the things we do right, and one thing I do right is that I have health insurance.
After I graduated from college, my dad paid for coverage for me for nine months. Then my job gave me insurance. Then I quit and paid for COBRA. Then I got another job that gave me insurance. Then I quit and got independent insurance, and that’s what I have now.
My current premium is $132/month, with a $5,000 deductible and a $30 co-pay. This is … fine. It allows me to go to the doctor when I’m sick, but doesn’t let me indulge in the personal cancer-scare-mongering I was so fond of in my youth (I tried that once with this plan, positive that I had ovarian cancer, you know, the symptomless cancer, and it was the one year I met my deductible). My plan doesn’t have mental health coverage, which is a hassle because it means I can only go to therapy when I’m flush and that I have to screen general practitioners based on their willingness to code my “depression” as “fatigue.” One day I’ll be able to afford the good stuff.
The reason I do this good thing for myself while forgoing other good things for myself is because my parents trained me to believe that it was The One Rule That Was Never To Be Broken, and for whatever reason, I chose to believe them. (Other rules that were never to be broken, but were broken: keeping a balance on credit cards, spending money without knowing where your next money was coming from, quitting a job without having a new job, buying plane tickets while unemployed, making life decisions based on a dude, etc.) This one, however, stuck, and I’m glad it did. It reminds me that I am capable of holding things together. Or at least this one thing.
Photo credit: flickr/aslakr


Japanese insurance firm replaces 34 staff with AI
@tachyeonz: Science fiction has long imagined a future in which humans are ousted from their jobs by machines. For 34 staff at a Japanese insurance firm, that vision just became a reality.
Click here to read more
Connect On:

Wordpress : http://bit.ly/2iOA7C4

Twitter :@tachyeonz

Utah GOP Congressional Candidate Says Santorum Is Wrong To Oppose Birth Control In Insurance Plans
By Scott Keyes and Travis Waldron

WASHINGTON, DC — Utah State Rep. Stephen Sandstrom (R), currently running in his state’s newly-created 4th congressional district, broke with his party’s presidential frontrunner, Rick Santorum, over the weekend on whether any health insurance plans should cover birth control.
On Friday, Santorum told the Conservative Political Action Conference that he didn’t think health insurance plans ought to cover contraception because birth control “costs just a few dollars.” Santorum dismissed contraception as “not a critical economic need” and therefore wasn’t one of the “things you need insurance for.”
ThinkProgress asked Sandstrom about Santorum’s comments at CPAC the following day. Sandstrom, who describes himself as a “stalwart conservative,” nevertheless said Santorum was wrong to say that no insurance plans should cover birth control. Sandstrom argued that if individuals want contraception coverage or companies want to offer it, “then that’s fine.”
KEYES: Now some people are willing to go even a little bit further on the issue like former Sen. Santorum yesterday said that he didn’t think insurance plans should be covering birth control at all. It just wasn’t something that should fall under the purview. What do you think, do you think he’s right on that?
SANDSTROM: No, I differ a little bit. I think it’s okay if an individual company makes that decision or an individual person wants insurance, they want to provide that option for people then that’s fine. But it should be the company making that decision, not the federal government deciding how they do it, and the individual making that decision.

Santorum isn’t the only GOPer currently poo-pooing the cost of birth control. On Friday, Rep. Tom Price (R-GA), the number five Republican in the House of Representatives, told ThinkProgress that “there’s not one woman” who doesn’t have access to birth control.
In fact, birth control can cost women over $850 in the first year of their prescription. Combined with fees from the doctors visit, the out-of-pocket expense could rise to over $1,200 for uninsured women. Such price tags are prohibitive for millions of women; a recent survey found that one in three women voters have struggled to afford contraception at some point.

Universal Health Insurance Boosts Entrepreneurship
By Matthew Yglesias
If we didn’t have a giant tax subsidy for employer-provided health insurance, then the health insurance market wouldn’t work for anyone under the age of 65. But insuring the majority of our working-age population through a giant tax subsidy for employer-provided health insurance is a double-whammy to entrepreneurship. On the one hand, it means that people who don’t work for firms that provide insurance are being taxed to subsidize those who do. And on the other hand, it means that failing to work for such a firm basically shuts you out of the insurance market if you’re at risk of needing health care.
So via Ezra Klein here’s an interesting study from Robert W. Fairliea, Kanika Kapurb and Susan Gates that attempts to measure the extent of this “job lock” by comparing the business ownership rate of males just-before and just-after they become eligible for Medicare:
We use difference-in-difference models to estimate the interaction between having a spouse with employer-based health insurance and potential demand for health care. We find evidence of a larger negative effect of health insurance demand on business creation for those without spousal coverage than for those with spousal coverage. We also take a new approach in the literature to examine the question of whether employer-based health insurance discourages business creation by exploiting the discontinuity created at age 65 through the qualification for Medicare. Using a novel procedure of identifying age in months from matched monthly CPS data, we compare the probability of business ownership among male workers in the months just before turning age 65 and in the months just after turning age 65. We find that business ownership rates increase from just under age 65 to just over age 65, whereas we find no change in business ownership rates from just before to just after for other ages 55–75. We also do not find evidence from the previous literature and additional estimates that other confounding factors such as retirement, partial retirement, social security and pension eligibility are responsible for the increase in business ownership in the month individuals turn 65. Our estimates provide some evidence that “entrepreneurship lock” exists, which raises concerns that the bundling of health insurance and employment may create an inefficient level of business creation.
This kind of study can’t capture the impact of the differential taxation, so it’s underestimating the total scale of the effect.

@jose_garde: “IoT — #Insurance of Things? — Leo Tech Services Pte. Ltd. — #CustomerExperience #IoT”
5 billion devices already connected, up to 20 billion by 2020 what is IoT’s impact on insurance for consumers and the companies developing InsurTech? read more


http://twitter.com/GiulioCoraggio/status/779832871288733696 #IoT for Insurance: Digitizing your policyholders https://t.co/GvI1y6taxU

Auto Insurance Ad…
Cure Auto Insurance advertisement (yes, its a legitimate ad). I just thought it was cool.

Rape Insurance, Drug Mules And Other Reasons Why The GOP Rebranding Effort Isn’t Going So Well
Republican National Chairman Reince Priebus CREDIT: AP PHOTO/JOSH REYNOLDS
By Igor Volsky
The Republican National Committee will gather for its winter meeting in Washington D.C. on Wednesday to strategize ahead of the 2014 midterm elections. The get-together comes almost a year after Chairman Reince Priebus released a so-called autopsy report that aimed to “grow the Party and improve Republican campaigns” in the aftermath of the 2012 presidential election. The “Growth and Opportunity Project” spoke with “more than 2,600 people, both outside Washington and inside the Beltway” about how the party can win over the nation’s changing demographic of voters and appeal to young people, African Americans, women, and Hispanics.
And while Republicans have softened some of their sharpest rhetoric and “deployed 17 full-time operatives to New York, Florida, California, New Jersey, New Mexico, Pennsylvania, Texas, Georgia and Colorado with the primary mission of bringing more Hispanics into the GOP fold” the party’s policies have fallen far short of its goals. Here is how:
1. Women’s health. “Our candidates, spokespeople, and staff need to use language that addresses concerns that are on women’s minds in order to let them know we are fighting for them.“ [Growth and Opportunity Project]
Republicans are advancing policies to limit women’s access to abortions and contraception in order to galvanize their conservative base ahead of the 2014 midterm elections. The GOP has placed anti-abortion ballot measures in states with close senate races and Congressional Republicans have made restricting federal funding for abortion services “one of their top priorities this year.” Last week, a House committee advanced the “No Taxpayer Funding For Abortion Act,” a measure that would prevent low-income women from using their Medicaid coverage to access abortion and require the Internal Revenue Service to conduct audits of rape victims. Republican senators and congressmen also filed amicus briefs arguing that businesses can deny birth control to female employees and have jumped on cases challenging Obamacare’s contraception coverage requirement as a way to undermine the law.
2. Immigration reform. [A]mong the steps Republicans take in the Hispanic community and beyond we must embrace and champion comprehensive immigration reform.” [Growth and Opportunity Project]
Progress has stalled since the Senate advanced a bipartisan measure to provide a path to citizenship for the nation’s undocumented immigrants, with Republicans claiming that the botched rollout of Obamacare and the government shutdown have undermined their ability to legislate on the issue. Speaker John Boehner (R-OH) promises to unveil key principles for reform and adopt a piecemeal approach to reforming the immigration system, but GOP leaders have yet to offer any kind of timeline for change. Meanwhile, conservative firebrands like Rep. Steve King (R-IA) warn the party against even taking up reform and compare immigrants to violent criminals and drug mules.
3. LGBT rights. “[T]here is a generational difference within the conservative movement about issues involving the treatment and the rights of gays — and for many younger voters, these issues are a gateway into whether the Party is a place they want to be.” [Growth and Opportunity Project]
In 2013, Republican lawmakers in Congress introduced legislation to allow businesses and government employees to deny recognition to same-sex couples under the guise of “religious liberty.” Should the measure become law, businesses could refuse to provide leave for an employee to take care of a sick same-sex spouse while federal workers processing tax returns, visa applications, or Social Security filings could refuse to do their job if it meant providing benefits to a same-sex couples. House Speaker John Boehner (R-OH) also refuses to allow the House to vote on the Employment Non-Discrimination Act (ENDA), which the Senate passed in November, arguing that a bill to federally prohibit employment discrimination against LGBT people, is “unnecessary” because “people are already protected in the workplace.”
4. Economic mobility. “The Republican Party must be the champion of those who seek to climb the economic ladder of life.” [Growth and Opportunity Project]
Last week, a potential agreement to extend benefits for those who have been out of work for six months or more fell apart after Republicans quibbled with the procedural rules under which the measure would come to a vote. The failure to extend benefits comes as Republicans are trying to portray themselves as sympathetic to lower-income Americans and reclaim the poverty issue. Party leaders like Sen. Marco Rubio (R-FL) and House Budget Chairman Paul Ryan (R-WI) are laying out new anti-poverty initiatives — such as consolidating all federal anti-poverty programs into one agency, replacing the Earned Income Tax Credit with “wage enhancement,” and promoting marriage — while still supporting drastic cuts to social programs that aid the poor. The GOP’s House budget, for instance, “would get at least 66 percent of its $5 trillion in non-defense budget cuts over ten years…from programs that serve people of limited means.” North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory (R) meanwhile has adopted a series of measures that provide tax relief for the rich while increasing taxes on lower-income Americans.
The public isn’t buying the rebranding. According to a recent Gallup poll, “32 percent have a favorable opinion of the GOP now, compared with 43 percent immediately after President Barack Obama’s re-election.”

Former Rep. Tom Davis To Elderly Woman With Diabetes: ‘Good Luck’ Finding Health Insurance
By Matt Corley
On CSPAN’s Washington Journal yesterday, former Republican congressman Tom Davis received a call from an elderly woman named Dorothy, who said that because she has diabetes, health insurance companies “reject” her. “They don’t even want to accept me,” said Dorothy. “Is that, is that possible they could get away with that? That seems like discriminating.”
Davis responded by saying that he understood her “dilemma” and that she probably wouldn’t be able to retire by 62 as she desires. Advising her that she’d be alright if she found “a job with a major employer,” Davis said it would be “difficult” on her own:
DAVIS: I don’t think you’ll find, probably be able to find some health insurance but if its with a small business or you’re going out on your own, it’s difficult at this point. There may be a government plan or private plans that are mandated coming out of this that are maybe able to help you. … I don’t know any reason why you shouldn’t be able to find something out there, but you want to look for an employer that has a health care plan. Good luck.
Later in the show, another caller criticized Davis for his “good luck” response, saying that it “encapsulates the entire Republican Party’s attitude towards any problems that are facing the American people today.” Davis replied that he didn’t mean “good luck” as a “kiss off,” but just as “good luck to you as you try to move through this problem.” Watch it:

Beyond responding to Dorothy with seeming callousness, Davis’ answer to her problem is also contradictory in its approach to a public health care option.
Davis first tells Dorothy that “a government plan” may “be able to help you.” (Which is true.) But when challenged by the later caller, he argued, “I don’t know that she can count on Washington to solve it for her.” In the next sentence, however, he said that she “can probably get some relief” when she qualifies for Medicare, which is government-provided. A NYT/CBS News poll this weekend found that 72 percent of Americans support creating a public health insurance option.
Transcript:
HOST: We’ll go to Dorothy from Newport Ritchie, Florida. Good morning, welcome to the program.
DOROTHY: Yes, good morning. I’d like to talk about health care. I’m in a predicament right now. I have diabetes, I’ve been shopping around, I’d like to retire at 62 and I’m having a difficult time. All — most insurance companies, they reject me for having diabetes. They don’t even want to accept me. Is that, is that possible they could get away with that? That seems like discriminating. I didn’t ask to be, to have diabetes or be sick, whatever. And…
DAVIS: Do you have adult, is it adult onset diabetes?
DOROTHY: Yes. Type 2. I’m only on the pill. I try to watch my weight, my diet, I exercise. So they, they say they cannot accept me. I’m not asking for free, I’m willing to go up to a certain amount per month that I could afford and I’m a difficult time. I don’t know that the people in Congress, the people in the Senate, they don’t have a problem. We put them there, they are set for life with their insurance.
HOST: Well, Dorothy, let me ask you. There’s a story this morning, front page of the New York Times, there’s a new CBS News/New York Times poll that says two things. First of all, 85 percent of those respondents said that the health care system needed to be fundamentally changed. Seventy-seven percent said that they were very or somewhat satisfied with the quality of their own care.
DOROTHY: Yes, but well, I don’t know where they get those numbers from. I spoke to many people, I work in retail and I’ve been in contact with, you know, customers and I speak to them about it on this side. I hear their comments about health care and no one is satisfied.
DAVIS: Well, Dorothy, let me, let me say a couple things. First of all, you know, I understand the dilemma you’re in. I don’t know if you’ll be able to retire at 62 or not. Frankly, I mean all of our 401Ks are down. I wish I could retire at 62. I think you’re going to find Americans working longer than they had originally anticipated, given the economic downturn and some of the economic realities. If you can find a job with a major employer, they’re not going to be able to reject you under those cases. I don’t think you’ll find, probably be able to find some health insurance but if its with a small business or you’re going out on your own, it’s difficult at this point. There may be a government plan or private plans that are mandated coming out of this that are maybe able to help you. But diabetes, particularly adult onset, is controlable. If you watch your weight, if you exercise, watch what you eat and, you know, continue I guess in this case to take your medication. I don’t know any reason why you shouldn’t be able to find something out there, but you want to look for an employer that has a health care plan. Good luck.
[…]
HOST: Our next caller is from Leslie Maryland, good morning.
CALLER: Good morning, gentleman, how are you?
HOST: Fine, thank you.
CALLER: Yeah, a little background here. I live in Maryland’s 5th district, Steny Hoyer is my representative. I am however, what I refer to as a progressive American independent
HOST: What does that mean?
CALLER: That means I have very progressive social values — and I see Tom smiling there as most Republicans would. But let me inform you that I spent seven years in Navy Special Operations and my birthday is 4/13/55, Thomas Jefferson’s birthday is 4/13/1743. So, I have a great deal of respect for Thomas Jefferson, who I think would be rolling over in his grave if he saw what was happening in the country today. But let me move on, I don’t want to waste a lot of time.
DAVIS: Probably all of the founding fathers would be rolling over right now.
CALLER: I’ll make, I’ll make my comment then I’ll get off the phone. Anyway, one of the things that I noticed this morning was Tom’s reaction to the woman who called looking for the job with health care and his final statement was “good luck,” which I think encapsulates the entire Republican party’s attitude towards any problems that are facing the American people today. I also have a master’s degree in economics.
HOST: Did you want to respond to Rick?
DAVIS: Well, congratulations on — well, I wish her good luck at this point. We’ll see what comes out of the health care plan. It wasn’t a “good luck, you’re on your own type of thing.” I think we all feel for people that are in those kinds of positions. But it’s very difficult. When you start having the government take care of everybody with a problem, as I said you’re doing it with borrowed money, what you want to see is — these are not simple solutions. It is progressive to continue to borrow money, to spend to take care of people’s problems. This tends to be a pretty inefficient way of doing things, number one. And number two, down the pike, somebody has to pay for it. I think I’m fairly progressive in my views as well. I was the head of a county government before I came to Washington and had to run it, inherited a pretty big deficit and was selected two years later, after making a number of changes, as the best financially-run county in the country. So I look at governance as a very very tough business and I don’t think “good luck” was like a kiss off. I would generally say good luck to you as you try to move through this problem. But I don’t know that she can count on Washington to solve it for her. She will be eligible for Medicare in 3 years. And at that point, you can probably get some relief on some of the issues she’s looking for. She wanted to retire at 62 years old. We’d all like to retire at 62 years old, but I’m not so sure government can guarantee that people can just retire at 62 years old or that we should be doing those kind of things and maybe that’s where I part company with the caller.

Ignagni: Government Role In Health Care Is Fine…As Long As It’s For Supporting Health Insurance Industry
By Igor Volsky
AHIP’s President and CEO Karen Ignagni (pronounced ig-NAH-nee) walks a tight rope when discussing the government’s role in the health care system. While rejecting direct competition between public and private insurance plans, Ignagni argues that the government should subsidize the industry’s insurance product (she calls it making health care “affordable”), provide coverage for the the poorest and sickest Americans, and require everyone to purchase insurance:
For government, then, as we think about responsibilities, our responsibility to get everybody in, to sustain coverage, to do it affordably, government, to begin to step in, require personal responsibility, but at the same time provide this helping hand or provide this assistance for people who are going to need help.
Watch it:

The government, Ignagni argues, should serve as a “helping hand” and provide peace of mind — but only so far as it benefits insurer interests. For instance, Ignagni and AHIP endorse a government-public hybrid health care system on one hand, but reject direct private/public competition on the other. Private insurers should have the exclusive right of insuring Americans under 65, because giving Americans a choice between a private and public plan would drive private insurers out of business, Ignagni argues.
But the stance is grounded in opportunism, not principle. While Ignagni is trying to keep a viable public program from entering the under 65 market, she strongly lobbied to increase the role of private insurers in Medicare — and argued that public-private competition in the over 65 market would increase patient choice. (Note that she did not ask for fair competition. Private plans participating in Medicare Advantage receive a 13–17 percent government subsidy). Here is Ignagni defending the subsidy:
- Are we going to maintain choices [in Medicare] in all markets or reduce or eliminate and the particular thing I would like to leave you with, I will be talking about the history in a moment. [Kaiser Foundation, 7/16/2007]
- But if you have the goal of maintaining choices in all the areas and if you have monopoly systems that refuse to contract with the health plans, if you are going to achieve that goal of maintaining choices in all areas, you have very few choices and that is also why private fee for service was developed. [Kaiser Foundation, 7/16/2007]
In short, Ignagni wants to play in the government’s sand-box but is desperately trying to keep the under-65 playpen all to herself.
Transcript:
PAGE: What about the idea that this is a pretty big government step for the government to say to every American, whether you want insurance or not, whether you think you can afford it or not, you must buy insurance, and if you don’t, you’ll be subject to government penalties. Is that an appropriate role for the government to take?
IGNAGNI: Well think of the alternative. If we want to have a health reform program that gives Americans the peace of mind and the health security that they can find coverage, notwithstanding whether they are old, young, sick or well, then we need to take the step of all being part of a system.
For government, then, as we think about responsibilities, our responsibility to get everybody in, to sustain coverage, to do it affordably, government, to begin to step in, require personal responsibility, but at the same time provide this helping hand or provide this assistance for people who are going to need help.

Morbid, Funny Advertisement for Travelers Insurance
This brilliant advertisement for Travelers Insurance recently appeared on Inc Magazine’s back cover.

The tagline is “Just when you’ve prepared for a million-and-one insurance risks, in walks a million-and-two.” In case the picture of the ad isn’t clear, a ceiling fan business is about to be visited by an abnormally tall customer. I really love the visual foreshadowing and the strong emotional reaction accompanying the viewer’s realization of the horrific fate that lies in store [literally]. The absurdity of the situation and the clever tagline add a healthy dose of humor as well that makes the ad a memorable one. Love it!
Travelers Insurance has some of the best insurance ads i’ve seen. Check out their Sony Bravia Rolling Ball Parody, their Rabbit Foot Reattachment Ad and their more recent Risk Never Sleeps Ad.

Lawmaker Accused Of Opposing Michigan’s Rape Insurance Law To Keep Abortion ‘Cheap For His Daughters’
Rep. Gary Peters (D-MI) CREDIT: AP PHOTO/CARLOS OSORIO
According to an anti-choice group in Michigan, one of the state’s lawmakers has staked out his position on reproductive rights purely because he wants to make sure that abortion remains “accessible and cheap for his daughters.”
The statement comes in response to a controversial new abortion restriction in Michigan that took effect earlier this month. Women who buy health insurance in Obamacare’s private market are now barred from purchasing a plan that includes abortion coverage, even if they want to end a pregnancy that resulted from rape or incest. They’ll be required to purchase a separate rider if they want an abortion procedure to be covered, which has led reproductive rights supporters to decry the measure as a “rape insurance” law.
U.S. Rep. Gary Peters (D), who is currently running for a Senate seat, is one of the lawmakers who has repeatedly spoken out against the measure. “As the father of two daughters, I struggle with how to tell them that the state we love and where our family has been for generations is now unfairly discriminating against them and makes health care less affordable,” Peters said in a statement last week.
Right to Life of Michigan — the right-wing group that was instrumental in getting the new law approved last winter — has seized on that sentiment. In a new website highlighting Peters’ abortion policy positions, the group cites Peters’ recent comments to assert that the pro-choice lawmaker “wants to make sure abortion is accessible and cheap for his daughters.”
Thanks to the persistent stigma that remains attached to abortion care, the comments appear to imply something negative about the women who may need access to abortion, and attempt to link Peters with that implication.
The congressman has condemned the comments as “inflammatory partisan politics,” saying that using his daughters to make a point is a step too far. Peters is calling on his Republican opponent, Terri Lynn Land, to distance herself from Right to Life of Michigan. Land has been endorsed by the anti-choice group.
“I’m proud to be the dad of two amazing teenage daughters, and I’m also proud of my record fighting to protect critical access to women’s health care,” Peters said in a statement provided to ThinkProgress. “Women’s health care is a serious and significant point of contrast in the U.S. Senate race, and it is outrageous that Land’s allies would cheapen this debate and distort my support for women’s health care… To include my teenage daughters in their attack crosses the line.”
 
A Right to Life spokesperson told Michigan Live that Peters has brought up his daughters on several occasions while discussing reproductive rights, which makes the point relevant to the current race.
Michigan’s new insurance restriction has captured a lot of media attention, but it’s hardly the only state with this type of policy on the books. Cutting off access to insurance coverage for abortion is an very popular method of restricting reproductive rights, and Obamacare’s state-level exchanges have introduced a new avenue for abortion opponents to accomplish this goal. Just as Peters points out, this policy is about making abortion care too expensive for many women to afford.
Since abortion is simply part of women’s reproductive health care, complicated laws that segregate it from the rest of the services covered by insurance are often too difficult to implement in practice. For instance, even though Michigan’s new law operates under the assumption that women can buy separate insurance riders for abortion, it’s not clear that these types of riders are even being offered on the individual market.

Santorum Supported Individual Health Insurance Mandate In 1994 Republican Primary
By Igor Volsky

Rick Santorum regularly highlights his conservative record on health care reform by touting his successful election against former Sen. Harris Wofford (D-PA), a Democratic champion of universal health care reform who campaigned on guaranteeing insurance for all Americans by encouraging employers and employees to share the cost of health benefits. “When I ran for the Senate in 1994, I ran against the man who was the author of Hillarycare in the United States Senate,” Santorum told Charles Krauthammer during an appearance on Fox News in October. “And I ran on a patient-driven, consumer-driven health healthcare system that is consistent with the philosophy of America, which is free markets, build it from the bottom up.” He expanded on the message following his surprising second-place finish in Iowa, “I’ve never been for government-run health care, never,” Santorum said to a crowd in Manchester, New Hampshire on Jan. 5. “Unlike the other two folks who are running here, who have supported individual mandates, who have supported top-down government health care, I never have.”
But as The French Revolution’s Nancy French discovers, Santorum did advocate for an individual requirement to purchase health insurance coverage — not in his general election challenge to Wofford, but in the Republican primary against businessman Joe Watkins. Watkins also backed the provision:
Allentown, PA’s Morning Call from April 7, 1994:
U.S. Rep. Rick Santorum, R-Pittsburgh area, and Joe Watkins, a Philadelphia businessman who worked in the Bush White House, are seeking the Republican Senate nomination, creating the only true Senate primary race….Santorum and Watkins both called for a “comprehensive restructuring” of health care. But they differed sharply on what elements should comprise a basic benefits package.
Watkins would include mental health services, long-term care, prescription drug coverage, dental services and preventive care such as immunizations. Santorum would not. Both reject abortion services. Santorum and Watkins both oppose having businesses provide health care for their employees. Instead, they would require individuals to purchase insurance. Both oppose higher taxes on alcohol or tobacco to help pay for care. They also oppose government-run health care and disagree with controls on doctor or hospital fees. They would cap malpractice awards.
Allentown, PA’s Morning Call from May 2, 1994:
Santorum and Watkins would require individuals to buy health insurance rather than forcing employers to pay for employee benefits. Both oppose abortion services and support limits on malpractice awards. Santorum says non-economic damages should not exceed $ 250,000, adjusted annually for inflation, and lawyers’ contingency fees should be capped at 25 percent. […]
Santorum introduced the idea of a medical savings account, called Medisave, which has become part of the Gramm bill. Under it, workers would buy major medical insurance and could make tax-free contributions to a Medisave account, from which they would pay for preventive services.
Many Republicans who now argue that the Affordable Care Act’s individual requirement is unconstitutional supported a national mandate as an alternative to then-First Lady Hillary Clinton’s health care proposal. In that sense, Santorum is in very good company. He joins Newt Gingrich, Mitt Romney, Tim Pawlenty, Jon Huntsman, Chuck Grassley, and Orrin Hatch and a growing list of prominent Republicans who came out against the conservative principle of personal responsibility in health care as soon as President Obama endorsed it.

The New Gold Rush: Insurance Against the Collapse

I get this question all the time from people: Why should I bother owning physical gold or any other precious metal like silver or platinum?
What’s my answer? I tell them owning precious metals is an insurance policy, plain and simple. And with central banks doing what they do best — dropping interest rates down to zero and putting the money printing presses into overdrive — boy, do we need some insurance these days.
Think about it. Let’s use another kind of wealth protection — fire insurance — as an example.
Records from the National Fire Protection Association tell us that, back in 1977, there were more than 723,000 house fires. A decade later, thanks to the increasing use of smoke alarms and flame-retardant building materials, the incidence of such blazes fell by 25% to 536,000 house fires. Nearly four decades afterward, and the number of home fires continues to decline by nearly 50%.
Yet we continue buying fire insurance for our homes (and renter’s insurance if we’re leasing). Why? After all, the odds of having a fire are lower now than they’ve ever been.
Our reason can be boiled down to three words: Just in case.
Gold Is Wealth Insurance
We don’t know when a stove might be left unattended just long enough for a grease fire to start. We don’t know when a bit of electrical wiring might short out, sparking a blaze inside of a wall.
That’s what insurance is for. Our homes are a valuable asset, and we want to protect them.
But what about protecting the rest of our wealth-related assets?
That’s why precious metals like gold, silver and platinum command our attention in these uncertain times. Perhaps that’s why a number of central banks around the world have sharply stepped up their purchases of gold bullion.
For instance, in 2011, Turkey’s central bank owned about 100 tons of gold, according to World Gold Council figures. Today, the bank owns nearly 500 tons. India, Russia and China have all stepped up their purchases in recent years, too.
Likewise, federal budget deficits remain a serious problem. In 2016, the Congressional Budget Office stated flatly that the U.S. government faces a serious problem in coming years because the economy just cannot grow fast enough to keep up all the financial promises made to Americans. No one knows exactly how such challenges will be resolved or how quickly.
Blue Light Special on Precious Metals
It’s no surprise either that sales of gold, silver and platinum coins achieved high-volume sales records in recent years. Certainly, citizens in other countries facing serious economic challenges are quickly realizing gold’s value as an insurance policy.
For instance, the U.S. Mint sold a record 47 million ounces of American Eagle silver coins in 2015, while gold coin sales leaped by more than half. Austria’s national mint posted its third best year of sales ever. The Royal Canadian Mint broke its own sales record for silver bullion coins for the third year in a row. Japan’s largest gold retailer recently said it saw a significant boost in gold purchases from ordinary people. “Many customers are wagering that it’s better to turn their savings to gold as a safe asset,” said Takahiro Ito, the gold retailer’s chief manager.
Of course, that’s exactly what our gurus like Ted Bauman and Jeff Opdyke have been telling members of The Sovereign Society for quite some time now. Clearly, with the rising sales and popularity of owning physical precious metals, more investors recognize they need some to counter the continuing imbalance in the global monetary system, and to make sure their wealth is prepared for all contingencies.
Kind regards,
JL Yastine
Editorial Director

Without Medicaid Expansion, Home Aides Caring For The Sickest Americans Don’t Have Their Own Insurance

As a home health aide, Rose Ruiz earns about $8 dollars an hour caring for Medicaid patients in Texas. Ruiz cooks, cleans, checks oxygen tanks, and changes diapers for disabled people who need her assistance. “I look at it as taking care of people who need help more than anyone else,” Ruiz explained to Bloomberg News.
But Ruiz doesn’t have any health care herself. She makes about $540 every two weeks, which she says isn’t enough to buy an insurance plan. And she doesn’t get insurance through her employer — typical for home care organizations, which have to negotiate their prices with the government and say they can’t afford to offer their workers health care. Ruiz would have qualified for public insurance under Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion, one of the central tenets of the health reform law that seeks to extend public health insurance to low-income Americans who don’t currently qualify for it. But her lawmakers have refused to expand Medicaid in Texas, leaving Ruiz without any options.
“The politicians don’t know where I’m coming from, they don’t walk in my shoes,” Shantelle Williams, another home aide working in Texas who scrapes by on minimum wage, told Bloomberg in reference to the state lawmakers who rejected Medicaid expansion. “That decision was for them, it wasn’t for me.”
Across the country, other health aides are in similar positions. About 37 percent of home health workers were uninsured in 2009. Thanks to a loophole in labor protection laws, most health aides make less than minimum wage and are often forced to forgo their own medical needs because they can’t afford to address them.
And, as Baby Boomers age, the hospice industry continues to grow. The low-paying home health aide position is currently the fastest-growing job in the country. That’s partly why home care groups are joining other advocates in Texas to fight for state-level Medicaid expansion. As they add more and more employees to their rolls, they worry about the cost of providing health care to people who would have otherwise qualified for public health insurance under Obamacare.
“It is shameful,” Jennie Baird, the president of a trade group that runs the hospice company Angels at Home Inc., said. “With a business with low-income workers like pizza delivery or fast food restaurants, they can pass on their higher rates to customers. But we can’t do that because our rates are set by the federal and state government.”
Home health aides like Ruiz and Williams are part of the approximately 1.5 million low-income people who will go uninsured in Texas because of Gov. Rick Perry’s (R) decision not to expand Medicaid. Some uninsured people in Texas have been seeking medical care across the border in Mexico because they can’t get it in their own state.

Health Insurance Giant Aetna Paying $80,000 For Health Reform ‘Town Hall’ Moderated By CNN Host Tony Harris
By Lee Fang

Tomorrow, health insurance giant Aetna is sponsoring a “town hall conversation on the national health system reform debate” at the Morehouse School of Medicine in Atlanta. CNN anchor Tony Harris will moderate the panel, which features lobbyists from the health insurance industry and opponents of reform:
— Panelist Mohit Ghose works for Aetna as the VP of Public Affairs, the lobbying division of the company. Ghose has served for years as a spokesman and lobbyist for the health insurance trade group AHIP. Ghose helped push focus-group tested attacks against Michael Moore and his movie SiCKO as part of the industry’s campaign to marginalize the impact of the film.
— Panelist Dr. Sheila Robinson is a representative from the Georgia Medical Association, an organization led by Todd Williamson. Williamson has gone on the record attacking health reform, and has been heavily involved in an anti-reform front group known as “Coalition to Protect Patients’ Rights” (CPPR). CPPR is managed by the lobbying firm DCI Group, which has set up “Smokers’ Rights” groups in the past for the tobacco industry.
The event, which is being funded by an $80,000 grant from Aetna, is co-hosted by the 100 Black Men of Atlanta, a group that also counts Aetna as a corporate sponsor.
This town hall is the type of “listening tour” event the insurance industry has encouraged to make the public believe that insurers support reform. Aetna is one of the companies on the “Strategic Communications Committee” for AHIP to help devise communication strategies to derail health reform. The committee coordinates positive messages from the insurance industry, while secretly funding and planning stealth attacks against reform. (Check out ThinkProgress’ report on the insurance industry’s “duplicitous” campaign to kill meaningful reform.)


What You Need To Know About Health Insurance If You’re Self-Employed
By: Kayla Sloan
When I quit my job at 24, one of the biggest concerns I heard from friends and family wasn’t about the $148,ooo of debt I still had to repay, but rather how would I pay for my health insurance?
At the time, I wasn’t overly concerned about medical insurance. Since I was 24, I could stay on my parent’s plan.
Alas, I am now turning 26, and the financial burden of finding health insurance while being self-employed is starting to hit home.
If you are self-employed and looking for health coverage, there are several factors you may not even be aware of that will impact your bottom line. I’ve done some sleuthing, and here is what I learned:
Beware of the Tax Man
One option is to forego health insurance coverage which can seem like a good idea when you are young, healthy, and think you can’t afford it. However, if you don’t apply for health insurance, you’ll pay a tax penalty called the “individual shared responsibility payment.” Not to mention, poor health can happen to anyone at any time.
I know some young, self-employed people who have considered paying this penalty instead of buying health insurance because of the high cost of the plans that are available.
They are taking a huge risk, betting that they’ll be healthy enough to forgo out-of-pocket medical expenses for illness or injury.
Not to mention the part most people don’t consider…if you are ill or recovering you likely won’t be earning money. Freelancers don’t get paid sick time.
Shop the Marketplace
Paying a fee for not having health insurance doesn’t make much sense, so another option is to shop the marketplace at HealthCare.gov .
You can apply for coverage during the open season for enrollment this year — from November 1, to January 31, — or if you have a qualifying event, you will be eligible for a ‘special’ open enrollment. Some qualifying events include:
Involuntary loss of other coverage. This can occur for many reasons, one of which is if you turn 26 and will no longer be eligible for coverage on your parents’ insurance.
Adopting or having a child
Marriage
Divorce
Becoming a U.S. citizen
A permanent move
To see plan prices you may be eligible for in the marketplace, start by entering your location. You’ll be asked some basic questions: age, gender, your household’s estimated 2017 income, and how much medical care you think you’ll need.
The marketplace will tell you whether you are eligible for a premium tax credit or other savings based on the income information you provide.
Once done, you will be able to see all of the plans that you are eligible for, including their monthly premium, deductible, co-pay information (for medical appointments and prescriptions), and maximum out-of-pocket costs. You can also see if your current doctor accepts your marketplace plan.
When I entered my information, I discovered that I am not eligible for any premium tax credits or savings, and my monthly premiums would range from $226 to $459.
But your premium is not the only number that matters. You also have to compare the deductibles of the plans and the out-of-pocket maximum for the year.
Another option for those under 30 is a “catastrophic” plan. These plans have low monthly premiums but a high deductible of about $6,850 for an individual. These could be an option to consider if you rarely visit the doctor or get sick and just need coverage for worst-case scenarios.
But make sure that you have the means to cover routine medical expenses out of your own pocket. And an emergency fund is a good idea, too!
Check out CentSai.com to finish reading this article and to read other personal stories about finance.

Are you in High School or College? Check out CentsaiAdulting.com to read articles, watch videos, and take quizzes on how to #adult in the real world!

Why the Insurance Industry Won’t Save Us from Climate Change

by RL Miller, in a Climate Hawks cross-post
A myth floats around among those seeking free-market solutions to climate change that insurers will be a positive force. Insurers are worried about the impact of climate on their business model. They will increase rates. Expensive insurance will drive people off the coasts. People and property won’t be as affected by coastal storms. Most recently, Fast Company asked whether trillion dollar storms will drive us off the coasts: “just how long until large chunks of America’s coastline become virtually uninsurable, starting with Lower Manhattan? Some would say this is a good thing, a perfect example of markets appropriately pricing risk and (dis-)incentivizing people accordingly.”
There’s only one problem: this market-driven solution won’t work.
Insurers are worried about climate change, with good reasons. A recent Ceres report found, generally, that they’re ill prepared for climate. Their model for pricing risks depends on historical models, which are meaningless in the time of the new normal.
For several years Munich Re, the giant reinsurer, has been advocating for governments to do something about climate change, based on rational self-interest: if governments can prevent it from happening, then insurers won’t have to pay out. Guess that didn’t work out so well — thanks, United States Senate! As climate mitigation seems to be failing, adaptation strategies become necessary.
The first adaptation strategy will be to raise rates. Here, the free market advocates are giddy. Coastal insurance will become very expensive, so no one will live on the coasts! yay! However, it won’t work. A look at two southern California coastal communities illustrates the free market failure of insurance to deter people from living near the coast.
Malibu is a notoriously high-risk area — I joke, “do you know what Malibu means in the Chumash language? ‘Stupid people live here.’” It’s prone to fires and landslides. Year after year, TV cameras cover muddy devastation, wrecked mansions, and teary-eyed residents vowing to rebuild. And, generally, they do rebuild. But they rarely do so with insurance money, because California policies don’t cover landslides. Insurance in Malibu has become so expensive that many residents rely on the FAIR Plan, an insurance pool of last resort. Although California’s FAIR plan was created in 1968 ostensibly to aid inner-city residents who were considered uninsurable after the 1965 Watts Riots, it now serves wealthy homeowners who have chosen to live in high risk canyons and coastlines. And wealthy people have lobbied the state legislature for concessions in coverage.
28 states have similar plans that cover certain high risk weather events — brushfires in Malibu, wind and hail damage in coastal communities in Georgia and New York. FAIR Plan high premiums and limited coverage haven’t deterred people from living in high-weather-risk areas so far.
Another way of understanding how high premiums fail to act as a deterrent is to imagine yourself with enough money to buy your dream car — that fire-engine-red Lotus, that 1965 Mustang, that Tesla Roadster. Insurance on that car is expensive. Does that stop you? If so, you’re rare. People who can afford to live on the coast do so for reasons wholly divorced from pragmatic cost issues.
In short, the free market of high insurance premiums and limited coverage hasn’t deterred people from living in pricey coastal communities. Climate change will raise premiums and limit coverage, but people will still want to live in Malibu. But what of less expensive coastal communities?
La Conchita is a small community sandwiched between the coast and steep, unstable mountains on the Ventura-Santa Barbara county line. A 1995 landslide buried seven homes. Property values plummeted, insurance became unaffordable, and people moved in anyway. Why did they move in? Because you could get a walk-to-beach home for $500,000 instead of the $5,000,000 you’d spend in Santa Barbara or Malibu. The area took on a surfing haven reputation — a little funky, a little high risk, a lot less expensive. People moved in, paid cash and thus weren’t required to have insurance, or went onto the FAIR Plan — again, the cost of insurance wasn’t a factor. Then a second landslide in 2005 landslide killed ten people, the $500,000 house is marked down to $350,000, and no one is buying it. Although no significant connection has been made between the storms of 1995 and 2005 and climate change, La Conchita may be a harbinger of what’s to come: high risk hamlets.
A new OECD report finds that the two American cities most vulnerable to rising sea levels are New York and Miami. Lower Manhattan is likely to end up like Malibu — very wealthy people willing to ignore risks — while Miami becomes a high risk island, cut off from the rest of Florida as a wall of saltwater moves inland. Insurance rates aren’t likely to uproot people.
In the medium term (10–20 years), I wouldn’t be surprised to see insurers attempt to restrict coverage for climate-related damage, much as has been done for mold/fungus coverage when mold became a hot button issue in about 2001.
In the long term, the industry may not survive in its present day form. It’s built on charging risks based on past patterns. But past history can’t map a new normal. The property insurance industry is reeling from the storms of 2011, and the life and health insurers have barely begun to consider the likely-profound impact of climate change on their mortality tables. If the federal crop insurance program has yet begun to calculate the impact of climate on its program, I haven’t seen it. Perhaps we’ll end up with some sort of two-tiered program in which government extends the concept of a FAIR plan (minimal coverage, high premiums) to virtually every aspect of insurance, and some wealthy people choose to pay even higher premiums for additional coverage. For now, the insurance industry shouldn’t be considered a player in the search for free-market solutions to climate change.
— RL Miller is a blogger with Climate Hawks

Talking to Insurance Companies After a Motorcycle Accident
Following a motorcycle accident, your life can be hectic. You will need to deal with law enforcement at the scene of the accident, seek medical attention for any injuries you sustained and may have to miss work while you recover physically. As you watch the bills piling up, an insurance adjuster calls you to discuss your accident. Whether the insurance company calling is your own PIP coverage1 or the other driver’s insurer, you should always be careful what you say. Adjusters have specific ways of asking questions and eliciting certain answers to try to avoid liability whenever possible. In fact, it is best to have an experienced motorcycle accident attorney communicate with your insurance company on your behalf from the beginning.
Insurance Companies and Fault
Fault in most accidents can be pretty obvious, especially to the drivers who are at fault. However, insurance companies want to minimize their covered driver’s fault as much as possible. One common tool they use is comparative negligence, also known under Florida law as comparative fault.2
Comparative negligence allows the insurance company to discount the liability of the person who caused the accident because of factors contributed to the accident by the victim. For example, an adjuster may say that because you were going over the speed limit, the damages were 10% higher than they otherwise would have been, or if you were not changing the radio station at the time of the accident, you may have been able to avoid it all together. Their questions may seem very unassuming, but your answers can be exploited and taken out of context to allege comparative fault. In some cases, damages from a motorcycle accident can be several hundred thousand dollars. This means that even a 10% assignment of fault is over $10,000.00.
Consequently, when confronted by an insurance company, it is important to be very careful with what you say and how you answer their questions. You should never lie, of course, but you should always understand the different ways in which your words can be interpreted. Accordingly, you should always consult with an attorney prior to offering any information to an insurance company. Here are some tips to remember:
You are under no obligation to answer any questions from opposing insurance adjusters without a subpoena. Never feel pressed into providing an answer in that instance.
You have a duty to cooperate with your own insurance agent; however, that duty is not breached by consulting an attorney prior to answering. If your own insurance is on the hook for an accident caused by you or by an uninsured motorist and you feel uncomfortable with their questioning, you should never feel pressured to answer immediately.
Understand the difference between notice and discussion. Putting insurance agents on notice of your name and the date and time of the accident should happen as soon as possible after the collision, but you can always call back with more details after discussions with your attorney.
Always assume that you are being recorded. Even if you are not being told that you are being recorded, many states require that only one party be aware of the recording. As such, choose your words wisely as they will be memorialized.
Originally published at www.dolmanlaw.com on October 7, 2016.

Return on Customer Investment: How Some Global Insurance Companies are Embracing Disruption

In a recent PwC study of global insurance CEOs, nearly two-thirds (59 percent) believe there are more growth opportunities within the insurance industry than three years ago. Yet, just as many (61 percent) see more threats to the industry than they did three years ago.
Why the duality?
As one insurance executive put it in a 2015 survey by Ernst & Young, “As an industry, we confuse innovation with product development…if we don’t learn the difference…and don’t learn how to become far more innovative much more quickly, we run the risk of being disintermediated by those that can run faster.”
Our lives are on-demand, online, and changing quickly. According to PwC, besides increased industry regulations, the second largest disruption recognized by global insurance CEOs is “changes in customer behaviors.” Yet the insurance industry has been slow to adapt to this changing reality. Over-reliance on legacy processes and outdated technology, and a lack of genuine customer understanding, have ostensibly stunted insurance’s ability to capitalize on innovation opportunities.
But customers themselves are an enormous source of growth for global insurers. If they can work with customers to gain a complete understanding of their lives, then insurers can more firmly grasp what’s motivating those changing behaviors. From here, they can begin to shape their business around — and quickly evolve with — customers’ needs.
Some are already doing this by making ongoing customer engagement a strategic imperative. Inviting customers into the business and partnering with them is working to great effect; it’s helping them genuinely “get” the people they insure. Here’s how.
Understanding customers, inside and out
The two most important steps insurers can take to improve the customer experience, according to a separate PwC survey of global consumers, are greater accessibility and tailoring to customers’ needs. But before tailoring experiences to needs, insurance companies first need to understand exactly what those needs are.
Aviva, the UK’s largest private insurer, saw an opportunity to innovate its small business insurance offering for a new breed of empowered small business owners. Through exploratory work and a series of innovation and co-creation sessions with C Space, Aviva and brokers got to know small business owners holistically — both in the context of their business, and outside of it.
The work revealed a key insight: small isn’t simple. Small businesses are varied and complex, and owners need insurance options that fit their needs exactly. For example, a sole proprietor electrician described how his main job is to change lightbulbs at a nuclear power plant. But operating near high-grade uranium makes getting insured hellish, to say the least.
Stories like this brought modern small business owners to life, retired long-held assumptions, and guided the design of new insurance options tailored to meet customers’ needs. As a result, Aviva now leads the market in insurance products and services for small businesses.
Rewriting the rules of customer engagement
Insurance has traditionally been a one-and-done product to sell. Customers need it, so they buy it; however, most rarely engage with the insurer, other than at the time of initial purchase or claim.
But a “low engagement” product has disadvantages. Satisfaction surveys won’t reveal customers’ lives inside and out, nor will they answer the questions insurers didn’t know to ask. So how do insurance companies get people enthusiastic enough to participate in sharing their thoughts and ideas around an “unsexy” topic like insurance?
Life insurance customers constituted a considerable segment of Zurich Insurance’s USD $70 billion in annual revenue. To grow that part of the business further, Zurich wanted to connect to a niche, hard-to-reach audience: affluent global jetsetters, many of whom in certain markets relocate every few years.
To motivate these customers to participate, Zurich invited them in as strategic product development advisors in seven global markets. The engagement was designed to be fulfilling and exclusive, a premier extension of the value customers were already receiving from Zurich Global Life. Members took part in everything from on-the-go ethnographic work to live discussions to large, ongoing strategic projects. And every member was greeted and kept apprised of their work’s progress via regular videos from the Zurich CEO. Today, Zurich Global Life is creating significant business impact as a result.
A customer-inspired culture shift
New and enhanced products and services are no doubt valuable. But innovation in its truest form can only come from a radical shift in the culture of the business. This starts with customer inspiration; it creates buy-in, provokes change, and instills customer empathy in the minds, and actions, of stakeholders. And, can all be tied to measurable ROI — a necessity for the numbers-driven insurance business.
Aviva and Zurich Insurance are proof that being an opportunistic customer-inspired growth engine works. Both are transforming from product-driven to customer-centric. Aviva now uses tangible customer narratives to help employees to see, feel, and internalize the life of the customer, and has even introduced a focus called “Customer” into its commercial business unit. At Zurich, reminders of the customer are shared easily, and at all levels, as “postcards to the CEO.”
Insurance companies are designed around people. The insurance companies that are embracing those people as opportunities are creating new value in a disrupted global marketplace.
Originally published at www.cspace.com on March 23, 2016.

Bill Clinton On National Market For Insurance: ‘That’s One Place Where I Agree With The Republicans’
By Igor Volsky
President Bill Clinton made a surprise admission during an appearance on Fox News’ O’Reilly Factor Tuesday night: he agrees with the Republican proposal of establishing a national health insurance marketplace and allowing companies to sell policies across state lines:
CLINTON: You know let your insurance company compete across state lines.
O’REILLY: That’s right.
CLINTON: In other words, create a national market for insurance…That’s one place where I agree with the Republicans.
O’REILLY: Yes I think you are going to have to defect here, Mr. Clinton. That’s what I’m hearing here.
CLINTON: No, no.
Watch it:

Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com
The Affordable Care Act includes provisions that allow insurers to sell policies within the confines of state compacts, so long as the companies follow the consumer protection standards designed and agreed to by the states. The Republicans are advocating something entirely different. Under their proposal, insurers would be able to circumvent consumer protections in certain states by selling bare-bone policies to the healthiest beneficiaries from states with the fewest regulations. Companies would have little incentive to do business in states that currently require coverage for cancer screenings, mammogram services, or other benefits and and will instead sell empty plans across the country to the most profitable applicants.
These beneficiaries will see short term savings, and as long as they don’t become sick, they will be paying less than if they had a more comprehensive policy. But once they do fall ill, these policies won’t offer coverage for the treatments they need and they will either go bankrupt trying to pay for their medical bills out-of-pocket or spend substantially more on comprehensive coverage. Sicker Americans will also see a cost increase, as healthier enrollees leave the risk pool to buy insurance from an unregulated insurer from out of state.

The naked truth about health insurance

The Supreme Court of the United States of America just listened to three days of argument as to whether or not the recent Affordable Care Act (ACA) is Constitutional. Central to the twenty-six States’ argument is that the Federal government can not compel its citizen to purchase something they they do want to buy.
Like these opponents of the ACA, I have a big problem with the Federal government telling me what I should and should not be buying. But I have an even bigger problem with my fellow citizens who insist on sucking out only the benefits of citizenship without shouldering any of the responsibilities. In short, we should never be at a juncture where the government is forced to make us play nice with each other.
What affects you, affects me. The United States of America is our community and we should never cede control to a government because we can’t figure out how to take care of each other.
Solve that problem and you have a small government.
But I digress.
What we are calling health insurance is not really insurance. It is just a way to pay for health care. Mandating citizens buy health insurance is not at all like forcing them to buy car insurance. Not buying health insurance is an act of denial by some that their bodies will not get sick or injured.
If we want to stick with an automobile metaphor, it is more like being in denial about changing your car’s oil and expecting it to run simply because the oil is healthy today. Ignoring your health care by pretending you will always be healthy only acknowledges you are healthy today but ignores the fact that your body wears over time. Like oil, some bodies break down faster than others. Sometimes, the oil pan gets punctured even when the driver is careful.
In other words, illness and injury are a certitude with a human body. It’s just a matter of when. No business worth a damn capitalizes based on certain loss.
The current health insurance market is unsustainable and the industry knows it. What nobody is saying is that the health insurance companies were unsuccessful at selling insurance to young, healthy people, so they lobbied to get this group covered — and paid for — by their parents. That took care of that group while Medicare takes care of the older group they didn’t want to cover. Now, the only the group left are middle-aged people who are getting fired left and right by employers, thereby getting dropped from coverage.
Individual plans? These are gawd awful expensive for anyone over 45 so most just drop coverage and pray they don’t get cancer or a heart attack. If the ACA is struck down, in ten years there will be nobody left to buy health insurance.
Insurance companies know this.
The ACA gives them 20–30 years to transition their business model. Without it, they probably have fewer than ten years before they will all be frantically merging, trying to pool assets and mitigate losses. The argument against the individual mandate is being driven by the very wealthy, the very healthy and the already Medicare-serviced. Selfish pack of idiots.
You just need to be paying attention halfway with half a brain to figure this out. It just is not that hard. The morality of providing health care or the constitutionality of forcing us to pay for something does not even need to be part of the argument.
The business model is simply unsustainable.

Lawyer: Lott ‘Initiated Contact With People Surrounding’ Insurance Fraud Lawsuit
By Matt Corley

During a deposition last week, Jim Robie, an attorney for State Farm Insurance, alleged that former Mississippi senator Trent Lott had “urged witnesses to give false information in a Hurricane Katrina lawsuit.” Questioning Lott’s nephew, Zach Scruggs, Robie asked if it had been his “custom” to have Lott “contact and encourage witnesses to give false information.” Scruggs refused to answer, invoking the Fifth Amendment.
In an interview with LegalNewsline, Robie said Lott had “initiated contact with people surrounding” the case involving alleged efforts to “defraud” State Farm:
“Clearly, the record couldn’t be more plain that Sen. Lott and his associates were talking to people that were key advisers to Mr. Scruggs, paid consultants and those who were creating an illusion that simply doesn’t have any basic fact,” Robie told Legal Newsline on Thursday. […]
Robie said Lott, a leading Republican, initiated contact with people surrounding this case, something unprecedented for a U.S. Senator.
“Have you ever had a U.S. Senator call you?” he asked rhetorically.
A spokesman for Lott’s lobbying firm told Legal Newsline that “the former senator had no interest in justifying the implication with a response.”
Lott has previously been reported to have used his position in the Senate to put pressure on State Farm. In May, the New Yorker reported:
Charles Chamness, the C.E.O. of a national insurance trade association, has claimed that Lott had threatened him, in a telephone call, with “bringing down State Farm and the industry.” Lott also co-sponsored a proposal to strip the insurance industry of an antitrust exemption that had been in place since the nineteen-forties.
Robie says “he will continue his efforts to depose both Richard and Zach Scruggs, during which he will probe the influence of Lott.”

Insurance Marketing: The Red Bull Way
Is It Time Insurance Marketing Was Disrupted With Purpose?
If there was such a thing in life as a general popular entertainment chart — kind of like music charts, the topic of insurance would probably be found down towards the bottom, together with paint drying, tax returns or civil service reform. Would you agree?
Personally, I love talking about insurance because I have a theory that everything can be interesting and I see the business of marketing insurance products as a ripe challenge that’s ready to break convention and make waves… Yes, I am genuinely excited by insurance at the time of writing this post and I don’t anticipate a change anytime soon.
So why is this? Apart from the fact that when I talk about insurance marketing in a room full of insurance brokers and practitioners, there’s a fairly good chance I’m the most lively and interesting person in the room, I have a theory.
The more dull and boring a product or service appears to currently be, the bigger the opportunity for dramatic change actually is. I also think that it’s easier to make a big difference with your efforts if you’re going from one extreme to another and this is exciting.
Insurance today, and for a number of years, has seemed to me to be stuck in a little annoying marketing rut and there are some repetitive traits shared amongst a large number of insurance brands that have all followed each other.
Annoying characters
Repetitive jingles or catch phrases
Product/sales/price comparison focused
Telephone numbers seem to be a main message
No differentiation from competitors in terms of messaging
Without me naming and shaming a list of highly influential insurance brands in this post (and consequently risking being put on their naughty step for the foreseeable future), I’m going to trust you to Google a few insurance brands at this point if you’re in any doubt of the five points listed above. I’d like to help some of these brands in the future so I’m not about to single anyone out but I think we can all agree that life in between our favourite shows would be more pleasurable without insurance advertising.
I can only guess that the logic for producing such advertising follows along the lines of:
Nobody will willingly listen to an insurance message so we have to shout it and work hard to interrupt a viewer to get their attention (whether they like it or not)
Annoying and repetitive = memorable and even if people discuss just how annoying something is, at least they’re talking about us right!?
Some of the insurance products are a little bit morbid and could shine a light on unpleasant or unfortunate circumstances, therefore distract people from the real situation with something else (like an animal, character or catch phrase).
It’s a land grab so stay on the mind shelf, make it easy to remember how to reach us and sell, sell, sell as much as possible.
It’s rare that people actually want what’s being sold but people buy because they invariably have to so we can win more business on price, thus being slightly less painful than the competition.
Heavy regulation prohibits certain ‘creative’ approaches to storytelling or marketing.
I’m sure that list is not exhaustive, but it makes sense and should ring true with you.
There’s no denying that these tactics, whilst annoying, do in fact sell more insurance policies, if only because audiences can’t physically remember any other brands. Whilst this may be a transactional and profitable path in the short term, it doesn’t necessarily build trust or loyalty and it certainly doesn’t breed brand ambassadors, fans or followers.
What if an insurance company took a brave step into the unknown and broke convention?
Breaking convention
If we leave the world of insurance for a second in order to take a look at a completely different world, I want to explore how breaking convention is sometimes not just the bravest move but also the smartest.
Walt Disney, the godfather of make believe and magic, undoubtedly mastered a tried and tested formula of storytelling that has successfully whisked away their audience into a fantasy world each and every time they brought new and old characters to life on the big screen. This magical approach has transcended generations and is world renowned for creating unforgettable childhood memories that stay with people for their whole lives. Imagine creating a brand with such power and positivity.
For nearly one hundred years, nobody challenged convention until one day in 1995, there was a new sheriff in town. Pixar launched Toy Story and changed the industry approach towards animated storytelling forever.
Pixar had examined the ‘rule book’ and they threw it out.
Pixar disregarded everything that had gone before them. Instead of following the tried and tested methods that are known to be profitable and popular, Pixar broke convention. Now for the first time, children (young and old) were watching a new breed of story that had no songs, there was no traditional love story, no villain and no happy village.
Pixar focused on their audience’s emotions, tapping into the real life elements and creating films that resonate with audience — not just children. They gave their audience more respect and more to delve into emotionally as a story unfolds with the same complexity and simplicity found in other feature films with wider appeal. The response was obviously incredible, Pixar changed the rules by living and breathing what they believed in and rest became history, the student became the master.
So, what’s all this got to do with insurance?
Pixar sell goose bumps and the insurance industry does not.
I believe the pinnacle of any marketing campaign is such that it delivers a message to an audience, which resonates with such impact, that it achieves a change in the audience’s emotional and physical state. If you can give your audience goose bumps, you’re on to something truly remarkable.
If the product you sell is a commodity item or something with a reputation for being boring, this is not a world-class excuse for boring or formulaic marketing, it’s a world-class opportunity to achieve something great.
I think this repetitive outcome is not a root cause of lazy formulaic marketing; I think these annoying traits are a symptom of something a little deeper.
The vast majority of insurance marketing campaigns are transactional, tactical and cosmetically campaign driven, which means there’s no evidence anywhere to suggest a strategic vision, a set of core values or beliefs behind these brands. There is no apparent purpose communicated anywhere in this industry and so the ability to connect with an audience is lost.
What a shame? I can’t think of a successful marketing campaign that wasn’t consciously created from a meaningful story, yet that is what’s happening within the insurance industry. Not one brand (that I can think of anyway) has undertaken this challenge and decided to follow in the foot steps of such brands as Apple, Innocent Drinks and Zappos, to name but a few.
Simon Sinek preaches about how brands that ‘start with why’ are infinitely more successful than those who lead with their ‘how’ or their ‘what’. I think it’s time we heard from an insurance company that led with their ‘why’.
Imagine trading in the parrot, dog, fox, elephant, squirrel or horse for a real person that has a remarkable story to tell. Imagine starting there but gaining the confidence to have fun with the real heroes of the industry. Imagine no happy village, no song and no love story to speak of. Imagine breaking convention.
The title of this post is ‘Insurance Marketing the Red Bull Way’ and so far I’ve talked more about Pixar. I think breaking convention is a first important decision. Deciding to be different and brave is key to making a big difference in this space, however, I believe how you then take action and how you empower your ‘why’ is the real challenge in this scenario.
In 1987, Austrian entrepreneur Dietrich Mateschitz took his inspiration from a small soft drink company in Thailand and began trading in both Thailand and other parts of Asia after he adapted an energy drink for the tastes of a western market. Their point of difference is simple; it has so much sugar and caffeine (taurine and glucuronolactone) in it that it will give you an energy boost for a short period of time — it gives you wings.
In 2013, Red Bull sold 5.4 billion cans worldwide and Mr Mateschitz is reportedly worth in excess of $4billion.
How? Red Bull entered the US in 1997 and the Middle East in 2000 and began to grow organically via a greater distribution channel; however, there was one defining decision that quickly followed that changed the company forever. Red Bull decided, and set out, to own all aspects of extreme sports. They nailed their colours to a mast and went after a market with everything they had. From BMX racing and cliff diving to Formula One racing and galactic space-base jump from a rocket 128,000 feet above the earth, Red Bull now unequivocally own that market.
Wow, what an amazing brand. To be so bold and to have a vision so big is no easy undertaking.
My $6,000,000 question to you is, if Dietrich Mateschitz sold insurance and not a sugary canned soft drink (which is apparently not on the healthy drink shelf of a supermarket), could he have executed on the exact same vision?
I believe the answer is yes. I believe that if Mr Mateschitz sold ‘Red Bull Insurance’ it would make just as much sense (if not more) to own the extreme sports market as any kind of soft drink brand… I know if I ever jump out of a perfectly good space ship at 128,000 feet my good lady will be more interested in whether my insurance premium is up to date than what drink I’ve packed for the journey up for sure! Fortunately for me, I don’t think I’ll be doing that any time soon.
If the insurance industry took a leaf out of Woody and Buzz’s book but then focused on a purpose that is bigger than the commodity that’s being sold, I am convinced we could see some remarkable brands flourish without using any of the five tactics/excuses listed earlier.
Red Bull are not pledging to save the world with their vision, but they have focus, clarity and purpose which is at least once removed from their actual product. Red Bull virtually sells itself because it’s so engrained with the world they set out to own.
How can insurance employ this method?
Red Bull should inspire every brand to rethink their marketing. Instead of trying to ram sales messages down your audience’s throats, the focus should instead be on the influencers in each and every demographic circle. While Red Bull initially did this with guerrilla stunts, such asMINIs branded with their logo (and hiring students to drive them around), they also moved into sponsorship deals with athletes in the extreme sports world to widen their reach. Their aim has always been to generate a buzz within a community and to influence the influencers to spread their message — if those at the top of the pack are willing to be brand advocates, the rest will follow.
What steps do insurance brands need to take to emulate Red Bull’s success?
A clear cause/vision for success
A strong set of brand values, ethos and higher purpose
A joined up strategic approach to all marketing/advertising
A customer-centric approach that comes before the service/product
A strong brand story that can live across multiple channels
Complete domination of a space (not necessarily actual Space, like Red Bull!)
Whilst this may seem a difficult challenge, it’s certainly not impossible, in fact I think it’s easy given that there’s virtually no competition thinking this way.
I truly believe that if the Red Bull brand did in fact release an insurance product, it could grow faster than some of our existing insurance giants. Purely because they have built a brand in a completely different way to that of a conventional insurance brand which does not own the hearts and minds of any particular sector, market or community. This alone should be enough to worry brands trading on old techniques and ‘also-ran’ marketing campaigns. Just for fun, what would Red Bull’s approach to insurance look like?
Red Bull Private Medical Insurance

What other brands have such brand equity that they could step into this space and potentially disrupt the long established competition?
Apple Life Insurance

Starbucks Insurance

Nike Accident Insurance

Innocent Life Insurance

Pixar Contents Insurance

Originally published at www.ph-creative.com.

Insurance Industry Proposal Fails To Control Costs
By Igor Volsky

Earlier this week, America’s Health Insurance Plans (AHIP) and the BlueCross BlueShield Association issued statements agreeing to offer every applicant health insurance if all Americans purchased coverage. Insurance profits aside, a universal mandate makes sense. If the young and healthy avoid preventive care and only enter the health care system at the onset of sickness, they will require more expensive treatments or develop costly chronic diseases. To contain costs, better manage chronic diseases and improve preventive care, everyone has to be part of the system.
But while the insurance industry has shrewdly co-opted the rhetoric of universal coverage, they have not adopted the necessary affordability measures that progressives typically advocate for. For instance, while most progressives support community rating — everyone pays the same prices for coverage, regardless of health status — and a new health care exchange in which private plans are forced to compete with a public option, the insurance industry would be happy to see the government subsidize coverage for those who can’t afford it.
Since insurance companies will likely conflate universal coverage with affordable coverage and resist cost-containment measures that could undermine industry profits, progressives need to clarify their goals for reform and delineate the differences:
Community Rating:
- Progressive argument: Replacing underwriting with a “community rating” system would set premiums based on age and location instead of the health status of the individual. This would bring down the cost of insurance for higher risk populations and guard against radical changes in premiums from year to year.
- Industry argument: Looking at the experience that states have had who have done guarantee issue, who have done community rating…they’ve had some prices increase, individuals have actually had a reduction in coverage in their market.
- Industry debunk: The problem with community rating is that if all health plans in an area don’t stick with it, it falls apart. If insurance companies to underwrite healthy applicants, the plans that are still community rating will be left with sicker populations and higher premiums. Community rating only works if underwriting is restricted and universal coverage is extended.
Competing Public Plan:
- Progressive argument: A competing public plan would use the administrative efficiencies of government-run health insurance plans, as well as the purchasing power of government to control costs. Insurers do not have (or are unwilling to use) the market power to counter the pricing power of many hospital systems or physician specialties.
- Industry argument: Where there’s a public option where they got to set the rules when competing with private companies, that would not achieve the type of goals on improving coverage and improving access, and making healthcare coverage more affordable.
- Industry debunk: Allowing private insurers to compete with a new public plan will lower costs and force companies to compete on quality and value instead of risk.


Use Protection!…We Mean Renter’s Insurance, Silly
By: Chonce Maddox
Renting out your first apartment and having your own space is a goal that most young adults strive for. After you work hard, save up money, and budget to put down a security deposit and pay rent each month, the last thing that’s on your mind is seeing everything going up in flames. Quite literally.
Unfortunately, that’s reportedly what happened to a single mom and college student named Gladys Sanchez, who woke up one night to see fire spreading through her apartment. There wasn’t much she could do to stop the fire, so she grabbed her son, and along with her friend who was spending the night, she ran out of the building. All she could retrieve were a few small personal items.
“We couldn’t breathe,” she told a local reporter as she described the distressing situation.
Fire officials arrived shortly after to put out the fire that was apparently started by an unattended candle. The fire caused about $100,000 in damage to her small apartment building and her unit was completely ruined.
While Gladys was grateful to have escaped the building with her son and her friend, all her personal belongings went up in flames, and she didn’t have renter’s insurance.
Renter’s insurance is required by most landlords, but not all. A basic renter’s insurance policy can cover everything from electronics and clothing to furniture and household appliances. But according to a poll conducted by the Insurance Information Institute, only 40 percent of renters in the U.S. have it.
Common reasons for not having renter’s insurance include:
Failing to renew an old policy when it expires.
Not understanding renter’s insurance and how it works, perhaps believing the myth that renter’s insurance is too complicated and time-consuming to obtain.
Believing that your landlord’s insurance will cover major damages to your unit or your belongings.
Not having the time to settle on a policy or not being able to afford it.
For Gladys, her busy lifestyle and limited income had made her believe she couldn’t afford renter’s insurance, and she had decided to put it off. As a hardworking mom with three jobs and a packed schedule of college courses, her initial concerns were finding suitable housing for herself and her son and making ends meet.
Since renter’s insurance wasn’t required by her landlord, getting it was not a priority. “I’ve learned my lesson though,” Gladys says.
Basic insurance policies are pretty affordable, ranging from $15 to $30 per month, depending on which company and policy you choose. Coverage typically includes the following categories:
Personal property protection (Be sure to document all your belongings and their estimated value.)
Liability protection (This can help protect you if someone is injured in your home and files a lawsuit.)
Guest medical protection
Even if your landlord has insurance, it’s still worth getting your own insurance to be on the safe side, because your landlord’s policy will mainly cover structural damage to the building and will not extend to your personal property.
Check out CentSai.com to finish reading this article and to read other personal stories about finance.

Are you in High School or College? Check out CentsaiAdulting.com to read articles, watch videos, and take quizzes on how to #adult in the real world!

The Public Insurance Plan Is Not Responsible For High CBO Scores
By Igor Volsky
Since the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) issued very preliminary cost estimates of the Health, Education, Labor and Pensions (HELP) committee’s health bill and the Senate Finance Committee’s draft legislation, Republicans and some in the media have argued that the somewhat higher-than expected price tags undermine the President’s contention that a new public heath insurance plan would lower health care spending:
- Rep. John Bohner (R-OH): The Congressional Budget Office came out with a score on Senator Kennedy’s bill, just part of the score — of the — of his bill, that says that the public option would cost over $1 trillion, and would cause 23 million Americans to lose their private health care coverage, and only 16 million of which would — would be covered under the — the government plan. [CNN, 6/16/2009]
- ABC News: The President’s chances for an optional health care plan that would be run by the government may be fading after a Congressional Budget Office report found a Democratic plan in the Senate would cost at least a trillion dollars over the ten years and cover just 1/3 of the uninsured. [ABC News, 6/16/2009]
- Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-SC): The CBO estimates were a death blow to a government run health care plan. The finance committee has abandoned that. [This Week, 6/21/2009]
- Fortune Magazine’s Nina Easton: And I think the, the big speed bump this week, of course, was that CBO, Congressional Budget Office study that said that the costs of a public plan are going to be well beyond what they expected. [MTP, 6/21/2009]
Watch it:

But both estimates never scored the public option. The HELP Committee’s bill omitted any language about the public plan and, according to reporting by the Health Beat’s Maggie Mahar, the CBO couldn’t “mark up the Senate Finance Committee plan because the Senate Finance Committee plan doesn’t yet exist.” “Yesterday, I spoke to Peter Orszag’s Office of Management and Budget and they confirmed that there are many blank lines in the draft CBO is looking at. What was missing included a public-sector insurance option,” Mahar wrote.
In fact, rather than add to the costs of reform, a robust public option could produce savings that could actually be scored and identified by the CBO as a money-saver. As the New York Times editorialized on Sunday, “A public plan would have lower administrative expenses than private plans, no need to generate big profits, and stronger bargaining power to obtain discounts from providers. That should enable it to charge lower premiums than many private plans.” “It would also shave hundreds of billions of dollars from the amount needed to cover the uninsured — a crucial advantage as Congress scrambles to finance the reform effort,” the NYT concluded.

May 15 News: Insurance Industry ‘Heavily Dependent On Scientific Thought,’ See Rising Climate Costs

The insurance industry believes climate change is a serious threat to people and property, yet only some companies advocate climate solutions. [New York Times]
If there were one American industry that would be particularly worried about climate change it would have to be insurance, right?
From Hurricane Sandy’s devastating blow to the Northeast to the protracted drought that hit the Midwest Corn Belt, natural catastrophes across the United States pounded insurers last year, generating $35 billion in privately insured property losses, $11 billion more than the average over the last decade.
And the industry expects the situation will get worse. “Numerous studies assume a rise in summer drought periods in North America in the future and an increasing probability of severe cyclones relatively far north along the U.S. East Coast in the long term,” said Peter Höppe, who heads Geo Risks Research at the reinsurance giant Munich Re. “The rise in sea level caused by climate change will further increase the risk of storm surge.” Most insurers, including the reinsurance companies that bear much of the ultimate risk in the industry, have little time for the arguments heard in some right-wing circles that climate change isn’t happening, and are quite comfortable with the scientific consensus that burning fossil fuels is the main culprit of global warming.
“Insurance is heavily dependent on scientific thought,” Frank Nutter, president of the Reinsurance Association of America, told me last week. “It is not as amenable to politicized scientific thought.”
Yet when I asked Mr. Nutter what the American insurance industry was doing to combat global warming, his answer was surprising: nothing much. “The industry has really not been engaged in advocacy related to carbon taxes or proposals addressing carbon,” he said. While some big European reinsurers like Munich Re and Swiss Re support efforts to reduce CO2 emissions, “in the United States the household names really have not engaged at all.” Instead, the focus of insurers’ advocacy efforts is zoning rules and disaster mitigation.
Alaska politicians wrestle with the impacts of climate change while adhering to recent policy conversions to not acknowledge the causes of climate change. [Guardian]
Secretary Kerry regrets that the U.S. has not done more on climate change. [The Hill]
The vaunted Thames flood barrier system may become overwhelmed by rising sea levels and flooding by the end of the century. [Guardian]
A new IEA report sees U.S. oil and gas production rising this decade, fueling the fossil fuel dependency of developing nations and giving short shrift to the climate impacts. [CNBC]
The European Union’s civil aviation body faces a September deadline to reduce global airline emissions, with little progress thus far. [Reuters]
Despite calls for no oil development in the fragile region, the Arctic Council added 6 new members, signing an oil spill disaster treaty acknowledging that there would be increased economic development and shipping. [New York Times, Bloomberg]
A new report from the Revenue Watch Institute finds that governments dependent on mining and oil-and-gas production face more corruption and government mismanagement. [The Hill]
NJ Governor Chris Christie has been active in responding to Superstorm Sandy but labels the cause of the storm “esoteric” which conflicts with his first-term environmental commitments. [Washington Post op-ed]
New research links the high suicide rate of North Carolina with coal-fired power plant pollution. [CleanTechnica]
Sulfur dioxide (the pollutant) does not seem to block the sun’s rays as much as previously thought. [LA Times]
Senator Jim Inhofe introduced legislation calling for increased oil drilling to offset Iranian oil, which would be difficult given the realities of the global oil market. [The Hill]
Billionaire environmentalist Ted Turner and coal-based utility Southern Co. are jointly purchasing five solar projects, significantly increasing the utility’s solar power investment portfolio. [Bloomberg]

House GOP Wants Americans’ Premiums to Help Fund Insurance Company Profits Instead Of Health Care
By Sy Mukherjee
Republicans on the House Energy and Commerce Committee will consider legislation repealing a crucial Obamacare consumer protection that requires insurers to spend at least 80 percent of their premium dollars on actual care rather than overhead or profits. The Center on Budget and Policy Priorities explains that the bill, H.R. 1206, amounts to a massive premium hike for more than 13 million Americans:
Nearly 13 million people recently received more than $1 billion in rebates on their health insurance premiums due to a health reform provision known as the “80/20 rule” or the “medical-loss ratio” standard. […]
Under H.R. 1206, insurers wouldn’t have to count the commissions they pay to agents and brokers as part of their overhead. Insurers could spend more of the premium on costs that don’t affect patients’ health or medical care, including greater profits, so consumers would be paying more for less value in their health insurance. […]
The average rebate was $151 per family across all markets; in some states, average rebates by market topped $500 per family. […] Regardless of how insurers pay the rebates, H.R. 1206 would likely reduce or eliminate how much consumers receive under the 80/20 rule.
This Obamacare provision is called “medical-loss ratio,” which is industry jargon for the ratio between premiums charged by insurance companies and the amount of that money insurers use to pay for actual medical services. By establishing a predefined, base medical-loss ratio of at least four dollars spent on medical care for every dollar spent on overhead or profit, Obamacare forces the insurance industry to streamline their business practices and direct more money toward direct health care services.
In attempting to weaken the medical-loss ratio provision, House Republicans are forcing Americans to subsidize insurance company profits rather than their personal care, thus raising overall costs in the industry while reducing the quality of American health care.

Conservatives Condemn California ‘Gay Infertility’ Insurance Bill

Anti-gay conservatives are very concerned about a new bill proposed in California that would require insurance companies to cover fertility treatments for same-sex couples just like they do for opposite-sex couples. AB 460 stipulates that such coverage cannot be denied because of sexual orientation — in other words, any couple that is unable to conceive “after a year or more of regular sexual relations without contraception” would be entitled to coverage equally.
Conservatives like Breitbart.com’s Ben Shapiro and WorldNetDaily’s Bob Unruh described the bill as “bizarre,” claiming it takes “pro-homosexual actions to a whole new level.” The American Family Association published the following quote from fellow hate group leader Peter LaBarbera:
This is about biology. Biologically, homosexuals cannot produce children, so politics cannot trump biology. The sad part is, we do have kids being placed in homes which are intentionally motherless or intentionally fatherless — and that’s very sad. But to force insurance companies to provide infertility treatment benefits to homosexual couples is the most ridiculous thing I’ve ever heard, and hopefully the taxpayers of California will restore some common sense to the Legislature and say no.
And in her condescending fashion, Maggie Gallagher added, “The fantasy continues…”
Currently, 15 states, including California, require insurance companies to cover infertility diagnosis and treatment in some fashion. In other words, heterosexual couples in those states who want to have children will have the same opportunity to do so without financial burden whether they can conceive the old-fashioned way or require some medical assistance to do so.
Same-sex couples currently must spend tens of thousands of dollars in order to have a child through methods like surrogacy and egg donors. This is an unfair financial burden that punishes same-sex couples and deprives them of the same opportunity to raise a family. Under this bill, all couples would have the same support to have children. It has nothing to do with “trumping biology”; it’s about creating equity for all California families.

What You Need To Know Before Making Major Insurance Claims

By: Jessica Ozar
We were just four days away from the end of our vacation in L.A. when a defective pipe burst under the master bathroom sink, and our home in Atlanta was drenched with water. Since my parents were at the house the day before with no problems, we figured the water probably ran for about 24 hours.
As brand-new homeowners with no idea what to do, we knew only one thing: we needed help. Luckily, we had knowledgeable people to consult.
But for those of you who don’t know anyone who has dealt with insurance claims in the past, I’m here to help you!
So what do you do when you have a major insurance claim?
Call Your Insurance Company and Notify Them of What Happened
The customer service representative we dealt with provided a claim number immediately and scheduled an appointment for a claims adjuster to come to the house. I checked my policy to see what would and wouldn’t be covered. While that was incredibly confusing, my sister-in-law works in insurance and reassured us that we had a good policy. I had only considered cost when I signed up for the insurance just a few months prior, not how comprehensive the policy was.
Secure the Home
My sister called the fire department, who helped to turn off power and water to the house in an effort to prevent further damage. She and my dad took our valuables and gathered extra clothes and items we would need when we returned from our trip.
We called ServPro before the claims adjuster visited. While ServPro had come immediately to pull up the damaged floors, take down drenched walls, and run dehumidifiers to dry everything out, I would highly recommend waiting until the claims adjuster arrives to call for damage control. We would have had to take financial responsibility for ServPro’s cost if the insurance company had denied it.
Document Your Losses
I began a spreadsheet with all our personal property as I had remembered it. Since we had just moved in, I had a general sense of what I had put where, but it was still incredibly difficult. For weeks afterward, I would say, what about this item? Where was that? The insurance company provided a link to an online system where I could input personal property. Because our policy allowed for the replacement value of a damaged or destroyed item, I researched those costs to show the adjuster.
Arrange for Alternative Housing
Our policy also allowed for “loss of use,” meaning that the insurance company would pay for us to stay elsewhere while the house was undergoing renovation. We decided that with a baby coming, we would prefer to stay with family, rather than at an extended-stay hotel.
Regardless of where you stay, the insurance company is still required to pay rent or hotel rates, meaning that they pay my parents rent on our behalf.
Hire a Public Adjuster
What we did not know is that we could have hired a professional who would advocate for us. These are individuals who know how to read insurance policies, and who work to support your interests. The report that our claims adjuster provided was very confusing, but we went line by line along with our contractor to make sure that everything was in-line with what should be in there.
Having a public adjuster would have helped take much of the stress off of us. You can also visit an insurance company website and find out what some of the big claims are that get filed under your zip code.
Don’t Start Renovations Without Approval by the Insurance Company
As we went back and forth with the insurance company, we did not allow our contractor to begin work, as we were told it would be more difficult for items to be covered by insurance if there was not full agreement ahead of time. For example, we needed to make sure that the insurance company allocated enough funding for underlayment and electrical wire replacement.
Pay Attention to Who Will Get Paid
The insurance company makes payments out both to the mortgage company and to the homeowners for building damages. We had to sign the checks over to the mortgage company, which will then disperse checks directly to our contractor.
When you choose a contractor, make sure that you trust them, and remember that you do not have to use only those that the insurance company recommends.
Check out CentSai.com to finish reading this article and to read other personal stories about finance.

Why Yoga Instructors Need Liability Insurance

These days, yoga and lawsuits seem like they could be in the running for America’s national pastimes, and if Salt Lake City area yoga instructors out there aren’t careful, these two different activities could go hand in hand. That’s right. If a yoga instructor doesn’t want a slip and fall lawyer breathing down her neck, she better get liability insurance.
Take Hilaria Thomas Baldwin, Alec Baldwin’s wife. Thomas was teaching a class at her yoga studio in lower Manhattan, when one of her students, Spencer Wolff, a Huffington Post blogger, attempted to dismount from a handstand and put one of his legs through a window. He concurrently brought on a lawsuit alleging negligence on the part of the yoga instructor as well as the studio, Yoga Vida.
According to ABC News, Mr. Wolff alleged that the class was overcrowded and he was forced to take a spot by the window. His lawyer claimed that his leg suffered severe injuries and that he couldn’t use his ankle.
According to Diets In Review, this case demonstrates one of the biggest issues between yoga instructors and students in Salt Lake City as well as the rest of America. Of course yoga instructors have the responsibility to be safe and keep their students safe, but human nature gives some a tendency to push themselves too hard in order to achieve a better result, which apparently doesn’t vibe with yoga safety.
In Salt Lake City, like most of America, people can get caught up in the race toward physical fitness, and when pushing yourself too hard, a slip and fall accident is much more likely, as it seems to be in the case of Mr. Wolff.
Yoga Journal reports that common yoga-related injuries include injuries of the muscles, joints, and back. A severe slip and fall accident can also result in broken and bruised bones — or in the case of Mr. Wolff, severe lacerations. The site also lists the claims that a lawyer will most likely bring to the table, including “injury as a result of; poor supervision, poor training technique and education, overtraining, lack of adequate stretching and cool down periods.”
So, if you are thinking about opening the newest Salt Lake City yoga studio, YogoJournal.com has some things for you to remember to help protect yourself from litigation: “always ask about injuries before the class starts, mind student’s limitations, and communicate mindfully.” These steps, along with liability insurance, should keep the slip and fall lawyer at bay.
Ian Carry is a legal writer reporter for Fusion 360, an SEO and content marketing agency. Information provided by Robert J Debry.

GOP Rep. Bill Cassidy Says Being On Medicaid Is ‘Actually Worse’ Than Having No Insurance
By Ben Armbruster
During a long rant against government-subsidized health insurance today on C-Span’s Washington Journal, Rep. Bill Cassidy (R-LA) claimed that being uninsured is better than being on Medicaid — the federal government program that provides health care for low-income Americans:
CASSIDY: Medicaid, for your viewers who may not know this, is a combined federal-state program that insures, so to speak, the low-income folk. And it’s actually worse than the uninsured! So Medicaid, Medicaid patients in some cases have worse outcomes than patients who have no insurance whatsoever. Now, why that is is not understood, but what is known is there is a problem with the quality of the patients on Medicaid — the quality of health care for the patients on Medicaid receive.
Watch it:

Cassidy didn’t offer any specific examples of how Medicaid patients have worse outcomes than those who are uninsured. But it’s important to note that the uninsured population has a lot of young people who don’t consume health care, while the Medicaid population generally has more risk factors and is in need of coverage. Families USA has pointed out that Medicaid “is cost-effective” when compared to private health insurance. And there’s the obvious financial benefit of having government subsidized insurance versus private insurance, let alone no insurance at all:
Federal law limits how much people in Medicaid can be charged for their health care. For low-income people, this prevents costs from being a barrier to obtaining needed health care. Low-income adults with private health insurance pay more than six times as much on out-of-pocket costs than do low-income adults with Medicaid.
The recession has forced more Americans to rely on Medicaid than ever before. The Kaiser Family Foundation reported last September that Medicaid enrollment had jumped to 48 million, while USA Today’s analysis a month prior put the number at more than 50 million. “Virtually every Medicaid director in the country would say that their current enrollment is the highest on record,” said one industry expert.
Also, Americans like Medicaid. A 2005 Kaiser poll found that 74 percent consider Medicaid very important and most would oppose cuts to the program. A Zogby poll last month found that 65 percent of likely voters said “they oppose policies that resulted in cuts to Medicaid funding for nursing home care for America’s poor and elderly.”

After Aggressive Lobbying From Health Insurance Industry, Premium Rate Regulation Bill Is Dropped In California
By Lee Fang

In California, Democrats in the legislature proposed a bill to add greater oversight over the health insurance industry. The rate regulation bill, proposed by Assemblyman Mike Feuer (D-Los Angeles), would have allowed the Insurance Commissioner to review rate hikes proposed by insurers, and block hikes if they are without justification.
The bill, which mirrors similar policies for the auto insurance industry and health rate review laws in other states, died a sudden death yesterday as health care industry lobbying intensified:
Groups representing insurers, hospitals and doctors lobbied against the bill, saying the regulations would add bureaucracy and do nothing to address high and fast-rising medical costs that help drive rate increases. Ultimately, they argued, rate regulation could reduce access to care.
As ThinkProgress reported back in June, health insurers mobilized opposition through a number of third party groups funded by health insurers and other health care industry businesses. For instance, the California Chamber of Commerce slated Feurer’s bill, AB 52, as a “Job Killer,” but obscured the fact that Kaiser Health Plans, UnitedHealthcare of Southern California, and Anthem Blue Cross of California are major donors to the Chamber’s political coffers.
Although Feurer’s bill is dead for now, the fight has not yet ended. Next year, advocates will push again for the bill, which passed the Assembly earlier this year and died due to obstruction in the Senate.
Rate regulation might also see momentum in the form a ballot initiative drafted by California Watchdog for the polls next year. According to reports, California Watchdog’s rate review initiative would not only include elements of Feuer’s bill, but also require a 20 percent rollback of existing rates. “We’re preparing an initiative to be ready to go on health insurance reform if we’re not able to get satisfactory results in the Legislature,” said Doug Heller, executive director of the group.

Social Insurance, Harold Pollack, and His Brother-in-Law Vincent
Must-Read: Harold Pollack: Opinion: Who Will Care for My Brother-in-Law Vincent?:
Social Insurance (with image, tweets) · delong
Harold Pollack asks for advice about how to talk about social insurance...storify.com
Originally published at www.bradford-delong.com.

The Problems With Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance
By Igor Volsky
Austin Frakt adds a couple of additional points to the question of whether Paul Ryan’s Medicare plan is anything like employer-sponsored insurance. To recap: Frakt stresses the key similarity — that under both plans, the individual’s contribution increases over time — and I note that people in employer sponsored insurance get a much better value for the dollars. But ESI is far from perfect, as Frakt notes:
(1) By mediating insurance decisions, employers constrain choice, and that’s not without a loss. In an NBER paper last year, Dafny, Ho and Varela estimated that loss of choice to be worth about $2,000 to a family of four.
(2) Risk adjustment in an exchange-based (or managed competition style) system makes the pool effectively larger. It’s true that risk adjustment across multiple plans is imperfect
. A single plan creates a single pool and there’s no beating that from a risk-pooling perspective. But it also removes all choice. (Back to point 1.)
(3) However, it should be noted that there is worker sorting, too. That is, individuals choose or stay with employers for the health insurance offered (“job lock” and related “entrepreneurship lock”). Thus, an employer-based pool might not reflect the risk of the population but rather the risk of those who choose to work for (or remain working for) that employer.
Frakt goes on to argue that the exchanges in the Affordable Care Act will alleviate some of these problems (i.e. job lock) and do a better job of pooling risk and providing group coverage for “the working-age populations.” In fact, it’s also possible that the ACA will begin to shift the nation away from employer-sponsored coverage. Under the law, states could allow large employers to access the exchanges beginning 2017, thus providing more coverage choices for Americans who want them.

Alex Chilton Didn’t Have Health Insurance, Didn’t Seek Medical Attention
By Matthew Yglesias
It seems that Alex Chilton’s death offers an illustration of the commonsense point that expanding access to health insurance will save lives:
At least twice in the week before his fatal heart attack, Chilton experienced shortness of breath and chills while cutting grass. But he did not seek medical attention, Kersting said, in part because he had no health insurance.
On the morning of March 17, she went to work. Chilton called her after suffering another episode; she arrived home before the ambulance, and drove him to the hospital. He lost consciousness a block from the emergency room, after urging Kersting to run the red light.

Now who’s to say how much good seeking attention earlier would have done. But it seems like it probably could have done something.


How Big Data Could Affect What You Pay For Car Insurance:
Big data is taking the world by storm, but it’s affecting more than just business operations. What could your data be telling your insurance company?
Originally published on Tumblr


http://twitter.com/GiulioCoraggio/status/779832871288733696 #IoT for Insurance: Digitizing your policyholders https://t.co/GvI1y6taxU

Unemployment Insurance Kept 2.3 Million Americans Out Of Poverty Last Year
By Travis Waldron

America’s unemployment insurance program is not as robust as those in many industrialized nations, but the program that is speeding toward massive reductions if Congress doesn’t extend it before the end of the year still kept more than 2 million Americans out of poverty in 2011. According to the National Employment Law Project, which is calling on Congress to re-authorize the federal unemployment compensation program before the end of the year, unemployment insurance kept 2.3 million out of poverty, cutting the number of Americans who were entered the ranks of poverty last year in half:
Were it not for unemployment insurance, the increase in the number of Americans living in poverty would have doubled over the last year. (While the number of people in poverty grew by 2.3 million from 2010 to 2011, unemployment insurance prevented an additional 2.3 million Americans from joining their ranks.)
Unemployment insurance is generally handled by the states, but because long-term unemployment was exacerbated during the Great Recession, Congress enacted the Emergency Unemployment Compensation program in 2008. If the federal program isn’t extended by the end of the year, 2 million Americans could lose unemployment benefits, and another 1 million will join them in the early part of 2013. More than 500,000 recipients lost benefits earlier this year because of the way the program is administered and because Congress reduced eligibility for it.
Republicans have pushed against past extensions of the program, arguing that it creates a culture of dependency on federal benefits that reduce the incentive to find work. But the federal program requires workers to search for jobs, and studies have shown that recipients look harder for jobs than those who don’t receive benefits. Meanwhile, in industrialized nations, there is no proof that more generous unemployment insurance programs lead to higher levels of employment: Greece’s unemployment rate, for instance, has soared even though it has one of the least generous programs in the world, while Israel boasts both a generous unemployment program and a falling unemployment rate.

‘I Hoped My Insurance Company Wouldn’t Find Out’
Seth Fischer in the Rumpus, writing about his mental health STUFF, and writing about it well: “My first reaction to my shrink mentioning PTSD was that I hoped my insurance company wouldn’t find out. Then I thought of worse things that have happened to people I’ve known or loved, that my list [of horrors I’d lived through] didn’t count because it’s not as horrible, because there is always something more horrible.”

This is useless spam for an auto insurance website, apparently.

The Insurance Industry Is Finally Waking Up And Smelling The Climate Chaos Coffee

by Anne Polansky
Several days before Sandy made landfall, my home-insurer sent me a love note: “Hurricane Sandy is on her way,” said the email, “and you may be impacted.” But not to worry: “We’ve got you covered.” Whew!
Who are the less fortunate, I wondered, that are not getting such reassuring messages, and are not adequately covered for damage associated with extreme weather? More broadly, what is the increasingly risk-exposed insurance industry doing to prepare and plan for increasingly intense extreme weather fueled by climate change?
The answer is, not surprisingly, much, much too little.
Most homeowners’ policies now specifically exclude coverage for floods (including mine in a low-lying DC suburb). Property owners in flood-prone areas, officially designated by the federal government, now must purchase flood insurance through FEMA’s National Flood Insurance Program. Others outside these zones can buy from NFIP as well. But controversy and some shady local politics have created bizarre situations where small, low-lying wealthier neighborhoods near bodies of water lie mysteriously just outside the boundary of the nearby designated flood areas — after all, being prone to floods is bad for real estate values. And, illogical beyond comprehension, the oldest most vulnerable properties that flood over and over and over again, year after year, have historically been charged lower NFIP premiums than homes in less-risky areas.
General poor planning and anticipation has created a dire situation in which the NFIP is itself under water, according to a Nov. 2 Washington Post editorial: “At the moment, the NFIP has access to about $4 billion, plus a $20.8 billion credit line with the U.S. Treasury — of which it has already borrowed $18 billion.”
In other words, sunk. Gotta make that call to Mom & Dad Uncle Sam again. How did this happen?
Well, for starters, 2005’s Katrina/Rita/Wilma 1–2–3 punch in Louisiana and Texas landed an $18 billion blow to the NFIP that had to be borrowed from the U.S. Treasury. Created by Congress in 1968 through the National Flood Insurance Act, NFIP was designed to be self-supporting and to offer flood insurance to communities prone to flooding that adopted floodplain management ordinances.
But hurricanes on steroids weren’t anticipated in 1968. The Act has been amended several times, most notably in 2004 to help reduce payouts to “repeat-customers” in flood-prone areas. Congress reauthorized the law again this year, creating a gradual set-aside of a reserve fund (still tiny), a justifiable phase-out of subsidized insurance for second (and third, and fourth!) homes and repeatedly flooded properties, a phased-in premium increase, and funding for flood map modernization (the poor feds had been using brushes on parchment all this time). Congress also gave NFIP permission to secure private reinsurance: a no-brainer.
Another problem is patchwork coverage. A recent analysis by the Wall Street Journal found enormous discrepancies in the percentage of residential units covered under NFIP, ranging from a full 90% coverage rate in Ocean City, Maryland; to 66% in Cape May; down to 40% in Atlantic City; and a paltry 1% in New York City. Oops. The other 99% are left to fend for themselves. (Sound familiar?)
In 2009 the U.S. Global Change Research Program issued a report that noted a disturbing trend: some major insurers have been withdrawing coverage from thousands of homeowners in coastal areas of the Northeast, including New York City. Too risky, I’d guess. And, a lot of folks in this region aren’t even aware that they need to buy an extra policy if they want to be covered for flooding. With a 30-day required waiting period, even an advance foul weather warning doesn’t give enough time for a last-minute CYA move. Of course federal disaster assistance going to NY and NJ will cover some of the losses from Sandy, but not all. Post-election, post-Sandy relations between Andrew Cuomo, Chris Christie and POTUS could get strained, no matter who wins.
Even with the flood exclusions, insurance companies of all types are doing the “holy crap” dance in response to Mother Nature’s recent fits of wrath. Most of them are being caught with their proverbial pants down.
In 2011, only one in eight insurers who responded to a survey conducted by CERES — a national coalition of investors, environmental organizations and public interest groups — had a formal climate policy in place. There are a few exceptions — forward-thinking trend-setters like Munich Re and Swiss Re (who convened a “Climate Week NYC” summit in Gotham just a few weeks before Sandy) have been on top of it.In the U.S. the leader of the pack appears to be Allstate. Who knew? Allstate’s website brags they are out there raising awareness, educating the public, and fighting for (dare I say) rules and regulations such as stronger building codes and more sensible land use policies to reduce the impact of catastrophes. (Uh, like building further away from the coastline?) People who build big expensive houses right on the beach and get federal disaster assistance when the roof comes off have never met a Libertarian they didn’t like. Sooner or later, though, people are going to have to realize that the up-close-and-personal ocean view comes with high premiums and no re-build options.
A more recent, Nov 2 email from my friendly home-insurer assures us: “Please know we’re committed to helping you get your life back to normal.” Really? What does normal even look like? Musician and activist Bruce Cockburn’s lyrics come to mind: “The trouble with normal is it always gets worse.”
The unfathomable — a major late-season hurricane hurling up the Atlantic Coast to the Big Apple, for example — becomes not just the fathomable but the feared, in our lifetimes. It’s the new normal. Get used to it.
Consider this: the northeast is already doing a headspin over 2011’s Hurricane Irene which caused 56 deaths and $4.3 billion in insured losses, and Sandy just one year later. Governor Andrew Cuomo’s new “joke” is that New York now gets 100-year storms every couple of years. Even a senior VP, John Miksad, of ConEd was incredulous in a CNN interview:
“[The storm] was sort of on steroids and I would have never expected it. I mean, this is New York City. This is not Florida or North Carolina. We’d have never expected to have two years in a row with this kind of damage to our system.”
Never would have expected? In the late 1990s the U.S. Global Change Research Program conducted a national assessment of regional climate impacts that included the metropolitan northeast and predicted just this: more severe, more frequent weather patterns that could mean storm surges, power outages, and inundation of NYC’s subway system. The reports were deep-sixed by the incoming Bush administration in 2000. We knew, or had reason to know. George W. Bush and his team, for one reason or another, thought it was important for us not to know.
Rick Piltz, a federal whistleblower who founded Climate Science Watch under the Governmental Accountability Project has covered this extensively, referring to Bush’s suppression of the National Assessment and related scientific reports and information as “the central climate science scandal of the Bush administration.”
So far, this mega-metropolitan region with heavy population densities hasn’t had the pleasure of experiencing an Andrew-caliber hurricane (Florida, 1992, Cat 5, $27B in damages), the likes of which haven’t dared to venture north of the Mason-Dixon. Yet. But it could, and scientists say it will: like our own death, it’s not a question of whether, but when.
An editorial in the Palm Beach Post captures an appropriate reaction to the Irene-Sandy one-two punch:
“The news is not just Sandy. The news is that Sandy comes one year after Hurricane Irene hit the Northeast. Freakish weather is becoming dangerously less freakish. Enough disbelief. Let’s figure out why it’s happening.”
Excellent idea. The IPCC, I am told, has a fairly good handle on that — something to do with smokestacks, auto emissions, and denuded forests. (Didn’t Al Gore do a movie?)
By-and-large, insurance companies are sweating bricks figuring out how they are going to manage to stay afloat and still provide various types of coverage for entire economic enterprises increasingly vulnerable to “weird weather,” frankenstorms, prolonged droughts, storm surges, water and wind damage, and so on — symptoms of an increasingly chaotic, carbon-steroid-hyped climate system.
If we are indeed going to be able to “avoid the unmanageable and manage the unavoidable” consequences of climate change, we’re going to have to recognize some basic laws of physics and just face the reality that an atmosphere super-saturated with CO2 and other greenhouse gases is essentially blowing the lid off of life-as-we-know-it. And insurance companies don’t quite know what to do about that.
A more sophisticated way of saying that is offered by Ryan Tate at Wired Magazine.
“…all too many insurers lack sophistication about the new prevalence of extreme weather, critics say, raising and lowering rates cyclically in reaction to loss-making events rather than through careful analysis of risk. If the industry can learn to approach climate change more systemically, as individual companies like Swiss Re have begun to do, it would have better data with which to influence policymakers. Ultimately, insurance company pressure around climate change could influence zoning decisions, building codes, and infrastructure design — nothing less than how and where people live.”
The industry itself is sounding the horns. An editorial published just this week in the trade journal Business Insurance rallies the troops:
It’s high time the insurance industry makes a bold move — to bring together business leaders, the smartest weather scientists and local, state and federal regulators to start working toward a comprehensive infrastructure assessment and a unified hurricane mitigation plan for the Northeast.
It’s great that the sleeping giant industry of insurance and reinsurance is waking up to smell the climate chaos coffee. But my question is this: If getting some multidisciplinary smart people in a room to figure out how to get our collective insurance coverage act together for the new normal that climate chaos promises and has begun to deliver is “bold,” then what does wimpy look like?
Anne Polansky of Takoma Park, Maryland is a consultant and writer specializing in public policies to deal with climate change and to advance sustainable energy options in US energy markets. She can be contacted at anne.polansky@me.com.

Arkansas May Kick More Than 90,000 Low-Income People Off Of Their Health Insurance Plans

On Monday, the Arkansas legislature convened a new session focusing specifically on fiscal issues. And at the top of the agenda is the effort to take away health insurance from about 96,000 people in the state.
Arkansas’ plan to expand Medicaid is currently on the chopping block, thanks to two key Republicans who say they oppose the policy. The state’s expansion won federal approval last fall, and the upcoming political fight will have tangible consequences for the tens of thousands of people who have already signed up for health care. If lawmakers don’t re-approve the Medicaid expansion during this fiscal session, those individuals will lose their new health plans by the end of June.
Last year, Arkansas Gov. Mike Beebe (D) figured out a way to extend health care to thousands of low-income residents by essentially striking a compromise between Republican lawmakers and the Obama administration. Arkansas accepted the federal money designated for states expanding Medicaid, but instead of using it to increase the Medicaid rolls, the funds went toward subsidies to help low-income people purchase private insurance. That compromise, which has been dubbed the “private option,” has served as an important model for other states where there’s a lot of political opposition to the government health program. Conservative lawmakers in Iowa, Pennsylvania, and Utah have been inspired to pursue similar Medicaid expansion plans.
But now, the balance is shifting in Arkansas’ GOP-controlled legislature, and the private option is in danger. Last month, Sen. John Cooper (R) won a special election after specifically campaigning on his opposition to the Medicaid expansion plan. Another Republican, Sen. Missy Irvin, recently changed her mind about the private option even though she supported it last year. That puts supporters of the plan down by one vote — and Democrats in the state are now worried that Medicaid expansion is “dead on arrival” in the legislature.
“If we lose one or two votes, it’s critical,” Beebe explained to Kaiser Health News, pointing out that Arkansas needs approval from 75 percent of the members of both houses to pass appropriations measures.
Aside from the immediate ramifications for the Arkansas residents who will no longer be able to afford health insurance, the unfolding fight also threatens to jeopardize similar Medicaid compromises in other states. “I do think it would have national repercussions if it were defunded,” Joan Alker, who heads Georgetown University’s Center for Children and Families, told the Washington Post. “I think a lot of it will come down to the perception why it happened and we’ll just have to see how it plays out.”
Before agreeing to the private option, Arkansas had one of the most restrictive Medicaid programs in the nation. A family of three with an annual income over $5,000 made too much money to receive assistance from the government program. And thanks to the state’s uninsurance rate, the private option is actually a smart financial decision — extending insurance to additional low-income families is estimated to save Arkansas about $90 million dollars in uncompensated health care costs.
Across the country, stubborn resistance to Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion will have stark consequences, particularly in Southern states that already struggle with high rates of poverty and uninsurance. An estimated five million Americans will lack access to affordable health care unless their lawmakers reverse their decision about the optional Medicaid expansion. And a recent study conducted by Harvard researchers found that the GOP-led states refusing to expand Medicaid will ultimately contribute to up to 17,000 avoidable deaths.

7 Steps to Improve Insurance Lead Generation with Content Marketing

To get more insurance leads, financial advisors need to drive more traffic to their website using content marketing.
This is everything you need to know to fill your marketing funnel with potential clients.
In a recent post, I briefly touched on the 4 phases of inbound marketing. In this post, I’ll be taking a deeper dive into the main pillar of the attract phase — content marketing.
The first step in the four phases of inbound marketing is to drive targeted traffic to your website. Here’s where we are now:

How does content actually help us get more leads?
Everything starts with blogging. Let me say that again, everything starts with blogging.
A blog is the single best way to attract new visitors to your website. Create helpful content that is relevant and answers your prospects’ questions.
This is how you become a valuable resource to your prospects and clients.
Now that you know how important it is, how do you get started? Follow these steps I used to create lead generating blog posts.
Step 1) Make a list of topics that are relevant to your audience
The best way to do this is by thinking of the questions that your existing clients are asking most often.
If they are asking you, then there are likely tons of people looking for the same answers online.
You can probably think of a few dozen of these right off the top of your head, especially if you’ve been in the business for some time.
Start with the “low hanging fruit”. These are the basic topics that you can quickly crank out that are relevant to a majority of your audience.
Some great ideas to get your thought processes going:
The difference between term and permanent insurance
How much life insurance do I need?
Best companies for auto insurance
How to plan for retirement
These are all topics I’ve seen written about extensively by top advisors.
Step 2) Choose a focus keyword for each post
For this step, it helps to understand a little bit about search engine optimization, or SEO.
Here’s a simple definition from Webopedia:
SEO helps to ensure that a site is accessible to a search engine and improves the chances that the site will be found by the search engine.
By choosing a focus keyword (or phrase), you are telling the search engines what the post is about.
It also helps you to focus on one idea or theme, which improves readability.
Step 3) Find at least 1 resource for each post
As a general rule, any time you make a claim, back it up by linking to its source. This lends credibility to your writing. It can also create some good will amongst the sites you are linking to.
For example, if I link to a Forbes article, I can reach out to @Forbes on Twitter to let them know I mentioned them.
It might even earn a share on their social media accounts, driving more traffic back to my post.
Step 4) Outline your article
It’s amazing how much time this can save. It’ll also help you to structure your articles in the most intuitive and readable manner.
By setting up your posts before writing, you’ll be able to “fill in the blanks.” This makes the writing process much easier.
Step 5) Start Writing
This is where the rubber meets the road. It’s time to put pen to paper (or finger to keyboard). You have to find your own writing process.
For me, I go to the same couple of coffee shops at the same times each week to do my writing. This helps me get in my writing zone.
Step 6) Edit using Hemingway
The editing step is so important. Ideally, you’d have someone else edit your posts for spelling and grammar. But whether you have that or not, plug your text into the Hemingway App.
This web application breaks your post down by several factors. These let you know how readable your article will be. I use it for editing all my blog posts.
Step 7) Just Hit ‘Publish’
This last step is what keeps a lot of people from publishing regularly. We tend to overthink every little word.
There’s always something we can edit, something we can improve.
This is a trap!
You can over-analyze something to death. Sometimes, you just have to hit ‘publish’. If you’ve completed all these steps, with practice, your writing will be just fine.
Don’t try to make it perfect.
These simple steps will get your content marketing machine up and running. That machine will fill your marketing funnel with targeted traffic that will turn into qualified leads.
Need help getting started? Click below to chat with us about how we can help.

This post originally appeared on the Advisors2Inbound blog

Wisconsin Assembly Bans Private Health Insurance Plans From Offering Abortion Coverage

The Republican-controlled Wisconsin state Assembly passed a bill banning private insurance plans from covering abortions except in cases “of rape, incest or when the health of the mother is at risk.” The GOP-backed legislation already had passed the state Senate, and it cleared the House early Wednesday morning by a 61–34 vote.
Democrats argued the law would create more burdens for women seeking abortions and another unnecessary measure continuing a “war on women.” But GOP state Rep. Joel Kleefisch disagreed. “What about the rights of the women who have not yet been born?” he asked. And the bill’s Republican sponsor framed it as a moral issue:
Rep. Joan Ballweg, a Republican sponsor of the bill…urged everyone to understand the strong feelings of those who supported the measure.
“It’s not a war, it’s what we believe whole heartedly,” she said to a silent Assembly chamber after describing her personal loss. “I would hope you respect that. We have different opinions.”
Democrats argued that government should not be the one telling women which abortions can be covered and which can’t.
“Keep government out of the bedroom and the doctor’s office,” said Rep. Terese Berceau, D-Madison.
The bill now heads to Republican Gov. Scott Walker’s desk, and it is likely Walker will sign it into law. In his new budget proposal, Walker also supported repealing Wisconsin’s Contraceptive Equity Law, which requires insurance companies to cover prescription birth control, and Title V funding, which cover access to health care like cancer screenings and access to contraception for uninsured men and women.
Under the Affordable Care Act, states are allowed to prohibit abortion coverage in plans sold in the state exchanges. Currently, 12 states have enacted similar legislation restricting insurance coverage of abortions since the Affordable Care Act (ACA) passed in 2010, eight of which restrict abortion coverage in all private plans in the state.
— Fatima Najiy

Must-Read: Miranda Dietz: Are California Employers Dropping Health Insurance for Part-Time Workers? | Are California Employers Dropping Spousal Coverage or Limiting Eligibility for Health Insurance? | Are California Employers Cutting Hours to Avoid Providing Health Benefits?: “Data from California indicate that the most pronounced declines in coverage…
…offers to part-timers are not among large corporations, but among very small firms… a significant decline in coverage for part-time workers at firms with three to nine workers. These firms are the least likely to offer coverage to part-timers, but in 2012 some 30 percent of them did. By 2014, the share had dropped to just 9 percent. The trends for medium and large firms, however, appear to be roughly flat.

Sen. Coburn Predicts The End Of Private Health Insurance
By Igor Volsky

Sen. Tom Coburn (R-OK) — a vocal opponent of health care reform — made several apocalyptic predictions about the U.S. health care system during an appearance at the Republican Women’s Club of Tulsa County on Tuesday:
“There will be no insurance industry left in three years,” Coburn told the Republican Women’s Club of Tulsa County.
“That is by design. You’re going to make insurance unaffordable for everyone — which is what they want. Because if there’s no private insurance left, what’s left? Government-centered, government-run, single-payer health care.”
Coburn apparently based his prediction on reported hikes in private insurance premiums, increases he attributed to the new law. […]
Coburn, facing re-election on Nov. 2, said it will be “the beginning of the end of America” if the reform bill’s so-called individual mandate is not revoked or thrown out by the courts.
Coburn is no stranger to bizarre comments about reform. During a town hall in September, Coburn said that Democrats were hoping that the law would fail. “I believe,” he told his audience, “the plan is for this plan to fail. In fact, I know this plan will fail.” Coburn also indirectly suggested that he wished that ailing Sen. Robert Byrd couldn’t cast his vote (“What the American people ought to pray is that somebody can’t make the vote tonight”), warned seniors that if health care reform is implemented they would “die sooner” and said he would go to jail to protect the conscience clause.

Immigration and Social Insurance
By Matthew Yglesias
You hear a fair amount about immigration in the United States and you also hear a fair amount about Social Security. But you hear shockingly little about the interplay between the two. Consider, however, that the overwhelming reason Social Security is facing a post-2037 budgetary shortfall is that population growth in the United States has been decelerating:

This is a free society, and if people choose to have fewer children than they used to that’s fine by me. I think that if we had more sensible policies around child care and housing the birth rate would probably edge up a bit. But of course there’s another way to increase the population growth rate. That would be to be more welcoming to people who’d like to move here. America’s gotten into the odd habit of thinking of ourselves as a country that’s burdened by the desire of other people to move here. But nobody thinks that way about a town or a neighborhood. Being a desirable place to live is an asset that we should take advantage of. About 165 million people say they’d like to move to the United States. It obviously wouldn’t be feasible for all of them to show up tomorrow all at once, but we could accommodate many more of them than we’re currently planning on, and doing so would strengthen our country in very many ways.
It’s true that higher levels of legal immigration aren’t the most politically popular thing around. But neither are tax hikes or benefit cuts. And unlike those, more immigration will actually boost our productivity and our growth rate.
Update:
45016, 44556, 44092

McCain’s Tax Credit Still Keeps Health Insurance Out Of Reach For Millions Of Families
By B. Furnas
This is part two in a series of blog posts explaining the findings of John McCain’s Radical Prescription for Health Care, a new paper from the Center for American Progress Action Fund. For more, check out part one.
John McCain’s health care plan would create a new health insurance tax credit worth $2,500 tax credit for individuals and a $5,000 credit for families.
But according to a new study, the one-size-fits-all tax credit fails to make insurance affordable for millions. It falls far short of covering premium costs for low income families and it ignores the higher premiums faced by individuals with existing illnesses, who are approaching middle age, or who live in states with higher medical costs.
For millions of families, it’s a five foot rope for a ten foot hole.
A $5,000 tax credit for a low income family is not enough to cover the average price of an insurance policy costing around $14,000. Many poor or near poor families would fail to use the credit at all because they wouldn’t be able to make up the difference in premium costs.
Additionally, older Americans, and those with pre-existing conditions, face much higher premiums in the private market, but John McCain’s credit does nothing to address this.
In fact, an analysis of CBO premium data finds that McCain’s credit would cover only a third of the premiums for individuals who need insurance the most:

McCain’s $5,000 and $2,500 tax credits seem like a simple proposal: but it’s also simplistic and insufficient for the vast majority of Americans. It’s one-size-fits-nobody.

Shaheen Amendment To Defense Bill Removes Ban On Military Insurance Coverage For Abortions
Our guest bloggers are Jessica Arons, director of the Women’s Health and Rights Program at the Center for American Progress, and Lucy Panza, Women’s Health and Rights Program policy analyst at CAP.

The Senate is currently considering the fiscal year 2012 National Defense Authorization Act, which will authorize funding for the nation’s defense for the next year, and negotiations over which amendments will be included in the bill may be settled as soon as today. One of the amendments that deserves attention is Senate Amendment 1120, offered by Senator Jeanne Shaheen (D-NH). The amendment would permanently remove the ban on military insurance coverage for abortions to end pregnancies that result from rape or incest.
The Shaheen Amendment currently has 12 cosponsors. It should have all 100. This amendment should be entirely non-controversial and should appeal even to those who generally oppose abortion but are sympathetic to its need in cases of rape or incest. Even the Hyde Amendment — the original ban on government coverage for abortion — allows for abortion in those circumstances. Thus, as it currently stands, civilian government-sponsored health insurance, such as Medicaid and the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program, covers abortion in cases of life endangerment of a pregnant woman and when the pregnancy is the result of rape or incest. Yet military government-sponsored health insurance, known as Tricare, only covers abortion care in cases of life endangerment. This means a servicewoman — someone who has volunteered to serve our country and defend our rights in a time of war — is not entitled to the same government-sponsored health care coverage that her civilian counterpart receives. That is the unacceptable situation that the Shaheen Amendment would correct.
This is not just a theoretical problem. According to the Defense Department’s Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Office’s FY 2010 Report, 3,158 sexual assaults were reported in the military last year, of which 27.7 percent, or approximately 875, were rape. However, underreporting is rampant — DoD estimates that 86 percent of military sexual assaults go unreported. That means there may have been closer to 6,250 rapes in 2010. About 5 percent of first-time unprotected sex results in pregnancy, but that number can rise in the context of repeated acts of sexual assault. Based on those factors, we estimate that upwards of 300 military rapes resulted in pregnancy last year. Furthermore, recent research suggests that junior enlisted women are much more likely to be raped and, at the same time, to have the fewest financial resources. DoD reports that more than half of military sexual assault victims are 20 to 24 years old, and the overwhelming majority earn less than $23,000 per year — barely above the federal poverty level for a family of four. Thus, the servicewomen least able to afford to pay out of pocket for an abortion following a rape are the most likely to need it.
Beyond the basic fairness rationale of treating our soldiers at least as well as civilians and meeting the needs of our most vulnerable soldiers, our national security demands the Shaheen Amendment. When politically-influenced policies interfere with a soldier’s access to care, they leave her unprepared to fight and thereby disrupt military readiness. The Shaheen Amendment would permit a servicewoman to receive safe, legal, and affordable abortion care on base or in the military’s health network in a seamless fashion along with the other services to which she is entitled after being sexually assaulted. In other words, it would allow her to get timely, compassionate care and to return to duty without unnecessary delay.
Ideally, servicewomen and military dependents would have coverage for abortion care whenever they needed it, but in the meantime, the Shaheen Amendment is a step in the right direction and the very least these brave women deserve.

Insurance company executive refers to high-cost patients as ‘dogs.’
By Zaid Jilani

In the state of New York, insurers are legally prohibited from discriminating against individuals who submit large claims. So when Guardian, a major insurance company, was faced with the high-cost claims of 37 year-old muscular dystrophy patient Ian Pearl, it decided to cancel its entire line of coverage in the state of New York rather than pay for Pearl’s claims. In an e-mail obtained by The Washington Times, it was revealed that one executive at the company refers to patients like Pearl as “dogs” that the company can simply “get rid of”:
Legally barred from discriminating against individuals who submit large claims, the New York-based insurer simply canceled lines of coverage altogether in entire states to avoid paying high-cost claims like Mr. Pearl’s. In an e-mail, one Guardian Life Insurance Co. executive called high-cost patients such as Mr. Pearl “dogs” that the company could “get rid of.”
A federal court quickly ruled that the company’s actions were legal, so on Dec. 1, barring an order by the federal Department of Health and Human Services, Mr. Pearl will lose his benefits.
The cost of Pearl’s annual treatment is approximately $1 million a year. The Pearl family is unable to receive the quality health care that Ian needs. “One-on-one skilled nursing is essential,” Mrs. Pearl said.

Oregon Insurance Companies Can No Longer Discriminate Against Transgender People

Last month, the Oregon Insurance Division of the state’s Department of Consumer and Business Services quietly issued a bulletin that constitutes a monumental new protection for transgender people in the state. In 2007, Oregon passed a law prohibiting discrimination against LGBT people, and the new bulletin dictates that as such, it is illegal for insurance companies to deny coverage to trans people or refuse to cover their medically necessary health care. Here is a list of actions that could constitute discrimination based on gender identity (actual or perceived) for all private insurers in Oregon, via PQ monthly:
Denying, cancelling, limiting, or refusing to renew an insurance policy.
Requiring different rates or premiums.
Classifying “gender identity disorder” or “gender dysphoria” (GI/GD) as a disqualifying pre-existing condition.
Denying coverage for a procedure that is provided for the treatment of other conditions of illness (such as hormone therapy, mastectomy, or vocal training).
Categorically denying coverage of GI/GD.
Denying mental health coverage for GI/GD-related issue in adults.
Denying sex-specific care (such as pap smears and prostate exams).
In a 2010 study, 19 percent of trans people reported being refused medical care, 28 percent postponed medical care due to discrimination, and 48 percent reported that they simply could not afford treatment. Bridging this inequity is essential for helping members of the trans community access the same basic level of health care as the general public.
Read the full bulletin, or learn more about filing a complaint.


http://twitter.com/GiulioCoraggio/status/796593233157619712 #IoT could drive new insurance models https://t.co/fZ6KidaeXo

If Obamacare was a conversation between the government, pharma, and insurance companies, here’s how it would probably play out…
Government: “Listen, we can’t just let people die in the street and you can’t just pick and choose who you’ll cover!”
Insurance: “Weren’t you taking care of the people who can’t afford our plans? Come on, I gotta make a profit here!”
Government: “Well, I do, but no one will let me cover who you refuse to cover, but make too much for me to take on under the law. Tell you what, how about you just cover everyone and I get you more customers?”
Insurance: “No! Hell no! You’re making us treat people who we can’t afford to treat at a net profit! Pharma, can you drop some prices or something?”
Pharma: *laughs hysterically*
Government: “Well that pain in the ass is not helping. But seriously, think of all those young people paying premiums, surely that will cover the needy people you’ll be taking on. And of course just to make sure you won’t just screw them, you have to have a certain standard of care.”
Insurance: “Fine, we’ll try it.”
And so a few years pass…
Insurance: “This whole thing is bullshit. We’re not as profitable as we were, we can’t offload enough people on you to make up the difference, and you want us to cover people we never wanted to cover in the first place. We’re running a business here, not a charity!”
Government: “What do you want me to do? I can’t get anyone to approve a program that actually helps people because something about socialism, and death panels, and some guy’s running around screaming ‘Bengazi,’ whatever the hell that has to do with the matter at hand. Pharma?”
Pharma: *stuffing wads of hundreds into pockets* “What?”
Government: “A hand please?”
Pharma: “I’m doing important research with all that money. Then there’s advertising, clinical trials, and so on. All that money I have in my pockets? It’s going to science.”
Government: “Don’t I do most of that for you through public grants to big research universities? Anyone know Hospitals and Doctors numbers?”
Insurance: “Don’t look at them, they’re losing money.”
Government: “So let’s see if I got this straight. Everybody is losing money, yet everything is getting 20% more expensive year over year and then everyone is still losing money, and it’s no one’s fault? That’s bullshit.”
Insurance: “Yeah, whatever. We’re out of your markets. We’re not gonna cover shit for anyone who doesn’t work for a Fortune 100 company anymore. And on this note, I’m giving myself a bonus. For getting a better deal for the shareholders.”
Pharma: *looks up from pile of money* “Research! Trials! Etcetera!”
Government: “You are all huge, huge assholes, you know that, right?”

McCain’s High-Risk Pools — A Gift To The Insurance Industry
By Igor Volsky
Yesterday, during Sen. John McCain’s (R-AZ) “tele-townhall meeting,” Debbie, a woman who was laid off her job and subsequently denied health insurance in the individual market because she was taking “blood pressure medication,” asked McCain if his health reform plan would “reform the insurance business” and help her find coverage.
McCain conceded that Americans with pre-existing conditions would have a hard time finding coverage in the unregulated market but reassured Debbie that she could find coverage in government subsidized high-risk pools:
We have to develop — the state of FL is starting to develop them  government approved plans. Which is the legislatures and the governors and the federal government join together with the Federal government making a very significant contribution so that they can establish risk pools and others and make sure that every American is able to get  particularly with somebody like you  that basically can’t get insurance, can get affordable and available insurance and the government is going to have to weigh in physically and financially to see that you get the ability and the health insurance that you need…These are tough times and a lot of people facing the same challenge you are, Debbie. I’m committed to fixing it.
Watch It:

But McCain’s “fix” is inadequate. As the Wonk Room has previously explained, high risk pools have many of the same draconian limitations as the unregulated private market: waiting periods, premiums that are out of reach for many families, substantial deductibles and co-pays, and limits on mental health and maternity care.Moreover, experts estimate that McCain’s “very significant contribution” to high risk pools is not significant at all. In fact, according to most experts, McCain’s proposal to boost funding by $7 to $10 billion is “nowhere near enough, [to cover the uninsured] particularly given the large number of people with pre-existing conditions who would need this help if employers send their workers out to the open market.”
Thus, Americans like Debbie would have to pay outrageous premiums and deductibles for health insurance because high risk pools, unlike general risk pools, don’t spread risks and costs across a mixed pool population of healthy and sick people. She would pay more for insurance because, under McCain’s plan, her pre-existing condition would force her into a pool that cannot offset the costs of treating her condition.
In some ways, McCain is right. He would “reform the insurance business.” But rather than increasing access to health care, McCain’s plan to subsidize high risk pools would only release insurance companies from covering sicker people.

Lucky You’re With… a Case Study in Terrible Insurance Customer Experience
I was unfortunate enough to be on the receiving end of some storm damage a couple of months ago, during which time I had to engage my home insurer to help me undergo the necessary repairs.
Water had seeped into my entire townhouse resulting in damage to carpet, floorboards, a mattress, several electrical devices and walls and parquetry, all of which would have to be replaced or repaired.
What followed was an inside look into what was perhaps a case study in what not to do when it comes to customer experience and why the door is wide open for insurance startups looking to disrupt the space by offering significantly better customer service.
So without further adieu I bring to you all of the pain points on my journey from first call along with recommendations of how to fix it (yes, free customer experience consulting for insurers reading this).
I was very tempted to include the insurer’s name in this article but I’m sure they (and my very smart audience) can work it out.
1 — No Update on Wait Time / Place in Queue / Call Back Service
The first few times I called it was on the back of a recent storm so understandably wait times were long. However, I was given no indication as to just how long or how far I had progressed in the queue. Unlike other companies with more progressed customer service, there was no offer of a call back either.
I had to hear the same “thank you for waiting, your call has progressed in the queue and we’ll be with you as soon as possible” in between ads every 30 seconds.
FYI, the longest I waited was 1 hour and 40 minutes.
Recommendations:
Let people know what the approximate wait time is
Let people know what position they’re in in the queue
Offer a ‘wait in silence’ service
Offer a call back service
2 — No “Sorry For The Wait”
While a long wait time can be excused, given increased demands on staff post a natural disaster, insult was added to injury on several occasions when not as much as a simple “sorry for the wait” was offered. Often I was greeted by an assistant asking for my claim number in a cold, robotic voice.
On one occasion, I mentioned that I thought it was pretty poor that even the long wait time when I finally got through was not even acknowledged and still got nothing but silence in response.
Recommendations:
Add some humanity to calls
Acknowledge the other person’s time has been wasted and extend a simple apology on behalf of the company. People will understand as long as it’s coming from a genuine place.
Say “sorry for the wait”!
3 — Trying to Upsell Customers While Having a Bad Experience
To further add insult to injury while waiting for more than one hour on several occasions to speak to a consultant, the entire time ads are spun trying to upsell customers different types of insurance. The last thing I was thinking about whilst trying to get through to a human being was buying more insurance services. There’s a right way and wrong way to upsell customers insurance services.
Recommendations:
Provide the option to turn of music/ads while on hold, particularly when the wait time is long
4 — Poor Social Media Engagement
Initially they responded to my tweets on Twitter with generic robotic responses which didn’t actually answer my question or concerns. They have since deleted their responses which actually looks worse.
Recommendations:
Don’t have a social presence if you’re not going to use it
Don’t respond with generic answers that don’t acknowledge the human being behind the Twitter handle or address the person’s questions or concerns
5 — Expectations Set But Not Met
When I first called my insurer I was told that somebody would be at the property within hours to check and seal the roof to prevent additional damage and to salvage the carpet from ruin by removing the water it had absorbed.
I was assured that “we want to prevent further damage”.
Nobody visited for three days by which point the carpet was absolutely ruined and required replacement.
On one other occasion, I was told that I would receive a call back within two days but had to follow up several days later due to a lack of said call back.
Recommendations:
Don’t set expectations that can’t be met
Set realistic expectations and add a contingency buffer to that
6 — Untargeted Communication
In between ads and being told that I’m an important customer during my 100 minute wait, I was also sold the online ‘claim lodging app’, despite the fact that I was sitting in the existing claims queue.
Recommendations:
Align communication with the queue the caller is in
How about an online app to check on the status of your existing claim and leave comments/questions for review?
7 — Excess taken out of settlement without prior notice
After sleeping on my couch for five weeks due to a ruined, wet matress, I was finally given the all clear to have funds forwarded to me to pick up a new mattress. The value of funds? $800. However, rather than advise me up front, the excess of $500 was deducted from this amount before being deposited into my account, leaving me with $300 to spend on replacing an $800 matress.
This was after I had been told that an invoice would be sent to be so that I could pay the excess within a given timeframe.
Of course the excess would have to be paid, but making expectations known again is critically important, particularly when it comes to planning and managing one’s cash-flow.
Recommendations:
Don’t just remove an excess from an insurance payment without previously advising the customer
Don’t blindly point to the insurance policy as a form of defense for this path of action
Invoice customers for the excess instead of take it out of payments which have been made for a purpose
If you ahve to remove excess from a payment, advise the customer beforehand so that they can better plan and manage their cashflow
8 — Contractors too busy to engage during busy periods
Customers have paid premiums to their insurance company in order to get support in times of need. Post a storm or disaster of some kind it’s to be expected that an insurance company’s preferred vendors and sub-contractors will be busy. But customers have paid premiums to get repairs carried out.
Recommendations:
In the event that preferred vendors are not available, customers should be permitted to engage their own independent contractors or buy replacement goods up to a certain pre-defined value, especially where time is of the essence and goods stand to perish if not tended to immediately, as was the case with the degeneration of my carpeting.
9 — Communication poor between my insurer and their subcontractor resulting in numerous call backs and follow-ups
The insurer’s sub-contractor had advised me to call the insurer on a Saturday to speak to a client manager. I then waited 30 minutes to get through to the insurer on this occasion and was informed that client managers don’t work on weekends.
I was told to call the insurer by a representative to speak to a client manager at 8am on a weekday. Upon calling, I was informed that client managers don’t start their day until 8:30am upon calling.
On one occasion I was told by an insurance advisor that “we were under the impression that it had all been fixed” despite no work having been performed.
Recommendations:
Improve communication between the insurer and sub-contractors (a shared dashboard perhaps?)
Ensure all employees of both parties understand when people are available in order to avoid unnecessary customer wait time and futher frustration
10 — No Accountability, Ownership or Monitoring
Rather than have one point of contact, I found myself being told by insurance advisors to call a client manager or the sub-contractor and by the sub-contractor to call the insurer, oftentimes getting through to the person I was told to speak to only to be told that I should speak to somebody else. At one stage I felt like a pinball being ricocheted between parts of this minefield that is the progression
Furthermore, there appeared to be no monitoring or follow up in place by the insurer to check in on the status of repairs, leaving it all to me. On one occasion contractors did not turn up on the day I was told they would carry out repairs and I had to follow up…again.
Recommendations:
One point of contact
Monitoring in place (single dashboard between the insurer and its subcontractors perhaps?)
Clear communication lines. If being transferred or told to spend time calling other parties, ensure I am being referred to the right people.
We’re living in an age where experiences like this simply aren’t sustainable.
Customers are in charge, they expect more and they will vote with their feet and they’ll tell the world about it via social media.
Optimising customer experience can be the difference between success (eg. UBER) and failure (eg. taxis).
How many of these customer experience mistakes is your company making?


3 Keys for Driving More Insurance Leads From Your Website
Your insurance agency website matters. A lot. In fact, your website will be the reason you win (or lose) the next decade.
In this new reality, financial services shopping starts online, for better or worse. They may not be ready to buy online, but they’ll at least do research, perhaps before even speaking to an agent.
If you don’t have a quality, mobile-focused website, your insurance marketing efforts will struggle.
There are thousands of people online who Google life insurance every day. In fact, the term insurance is the most expensive search term on Google Adwords.
If you can capture some of this traffic, then you’ll be able to create your own insurance lead generation machine.
Here are 3 keys that will help you drive more leads to your website and turn them into clients.
1) Understand your audience
Your website must cater to your target market, but the insurance industry is a broad subject. And more often than not, most insurance agencies have specialties they want to focus on.
Your website should speak to that target audience in a way that is meaningful and relevant to them. This means focusing on your core offerings. Don’t try be everything to everyone. If you do, you’ll be competing with much larger companies with more resources.
To start, build personas that represent your ideal client profile. This will help you think about how to create content for them.
2) Establish a branding guide
Your site must stand out from your competition — but in the right manner. Our industry is one of the most highly regulated in the U.S. You have to be intentional about your online persona.
We recommend creating an internal style-guide for any online publishing. The ensures that your voice and tone are consistent across your entire web presence, including all pages on your website.
This should include official definitions and consistent terminology so that you are consistent. Also, consistent brand standards helps to reinforce to your visitors your vision and core focus.
3) Integrate social media
For better or worse, we are living in the era of social media.
It is imperative that you use social media to promote your agency. Obviously, it’s also important to add your site URL to your agency’s active social media channels. Use these mediums to drive traffic. You’ll lose credibility if your social channels are out of date.
These tips will help you improve your insurance agency website right away.
We love helping advisors build great websites and generate leads from their online marketing.
Click here to chat about growing your agency.

This post originally appeared on the Advisors 2 Inbound blog.

GOP Rep. On Allowing Young Adults To Stay On Parents’ Health Insurance: ‘What Business Is It Of The Government?’
By Scott Keyes

FORT GARLAND, Colorado — Rep. Scott Tipton (R-CO) doesn’t have 99 problems, but the government allowing young adults to stay on their parents’ health care plans is one.
In an interview after a town hall on Tuesday, ThinkProgress asked Tipton about specific protections in Obamacare, including that people with pre-existing conditions can’t be denied coverage by insurance companies. Tipton, no fan of the landmark health care law, used the opportunity to criticize Obamacare’s protections for young adults that allows them to stay on their parents’ health insurance until they turn 26. “What business is it of the government?” Tipton asked:
KEYES: What about something like, one of the regulations in Obamacare says that people with pre-existing conditions can’t be denied coverage. For someone with leukemia, do you think it should be against the law for insurance companies to be able to deny them, or do you think that shouldn’t be a federal law?
TIPTON: Glad you brought that up. We actually have legislation ready to go. I visited with Congressman Price, a medical doctor, to be able to look at these state exchanges. You want to make sure it’s affordable as well, it’s competitive, we aren’t bankrupting somebody, to be able to address pre-existing conditions. If you want to be able to keep your children on your health care insurance policy, people are touting until age 26. My question is, what business is it of the government? If you want to keep your kids on until they’re 30, 40, what business is it of the government?
SoundCloud Widget
Edit descriptionw.soundcloud.com
Contra Tipton’s assertions that families can “keep your kids on until they’re 30, 40,” most insurance companies only allowed parents to keep dependents on their plan until they turned around 22 prior to Obamacare’s passage. Keeping dependents on a plan until they’re 40 was (and is) not an option.
A new study found that in the two years since this provision of Obamacare was enacted, 6.6 million young adults now have health insurance through their parents’ plans. Unsurprisingly, the new protection is extremely popular, enjoying 71 percent support in a recent Kaiser Family Foundation poll.
ThinkProgress later pressed Tipton on whether he supported a federal law that would protect people with pre-existing conditions from being denied health insurance. He refused to say.

Gaming The Exchanges And Mini Health Insurance Plans
By Igor Volsky
Yesterday, Aaron Carroll noted how private HMOs participating in Medicare successfully pushed sicker individuals off their rolls and suggested that insurers’ knack for manipulating the system holds important lessons for health reform implementers. Indeed, many are already raising alarms about a little noticed provision in the health care law that would allow insurance companies to lure younger and healthier Americans out of the exchanges and into so-called mini health plans, which have low annual limits and very modest benefits.
As Ken Terry explains, if an insurer can prove that “switching to comprehensive coverage would lead to significant premium increases or force employers to drop insurance benefits,” they can continue to offer low-cost, low-benefit plans:
This lack of universality could cause the same kind of “death spirals” that occurred in the small-business health insurance purchasing alliances of the 1990s. If healthy people tend to buy low-cost insurance outside of the exchanges, the increasing proportion of sick people in the exchanges could force rates up and induce carriers to withdraw from them. […]
This is where the HHS determination on waivers comes in. A restrictive approach would mean that most plans offered outside of the state exchanges would have to be similar to those inside of them. This offers the best chance for the exchanges to survive: Because people would receive federal subsidies only for insurance purchased through an exchange, healthy people would be less likely to leave the state-sponsored market to buy a policy that was nearly identical to one offered through the exchange. But if HHS takes a looser stance, and mini-plans endure, many healthy people and firms with healthy employees will buy their insurance outside the exchanges, even without subsidies. If so, the exchanges will become unprofitable for insurance companies to participate in.
HHS certainly has its hands full — allowing insurers to offer mini plans outside of the exchanges could undermine the entire foundation of the law; cutting them off would force some businesses to drop coverage all together and push some beneficiaries into more comprehensive and more expensive coverage. But health experts and consumer advocates I spoke to believe that in some ways the problem is overstated. They claim that beginning in 2014, demand for the mini plans will naturally diminish since these policies won’t offer the standard benefit packages or meet the actuarial value of creditable coverage — the insurance that complies with the individual mandate requirements. The problem is in the interim. As younger and healthier individuals continue to buy these subprime policies, they will fall victim to the fine print and annual limits and abdicate their eligibility in more comprehensive programs like Medicaid.
In 2014, the more pronounced opportunity for cherry picking is in the structure of the Bronze plan. Under the law, insurers that participate in the exchange are required to market the Silver and Gold tier plans in the exchanges but are exempt from marketing the Bronze plans to exchange beneficiaries. Insurers could therefore sell the lower-cost/high deductible Bronze plan outside of the exchange or stay out of the exchanges altogether and attract healthier people into the non-exchange nongroup market. Some states like California are trying to avoid this outcome by requiring insurers “to provide the same types of policies inside and outside of the exchanges.” But as expected, they’re receiving a lot of opposition from the insurance industry.

CORPORATE ACTION: Goldlink Insurance Retirement Of CEO

Goldlink Insurance Plc have announced the early retirement of their Managing Director/CEO Mr. Gbolahan Olutayo.
Mrs Olufunke Moore has been appointed as the Acting Managing Director pending the appointment of a substantive Managing Director/CEO.
Source: NSE

Artificial Intelligence and the Insurance Industry

Artificial Intelligence (AI) encompasses everything from machine learning to the Internet of Things (IoT). Thanks to these tech advancements, AI systems are now able to perform tasks that previously required human intelligence, such as visual and speech processing, decision-making and language translation.
From self-driving cars to automated assistants, AI is rapidly evolving and finding its way into surprising daily use cases, leading people to underestimate how it’s fundamentally transforming our world. It’s disrupting and improving organizations across all industries, and now it’s headed for insurance.
Below, we’ve rounded up AI applications with the greatest potential to impact the insurance industry.
AI is providing endless opportunities in analytics, marketing and software development for innovative professionals who are able to leverage technology effectively. With AI, there will be a shift in the skills needed to work in the insurance industry. Tech savvy professionals must train for the future and learn to work alongside AI to reveal their true creative potential.
Insurance agents who once spent countless hours asking routine questions, submitting requests for insurance, filing paperwork and processing claims can now turn to sophisticated systems for accuracy, efficiency and effective execution of previously manual tasks. AI and machine learning can recognize patterns in vast amounts of data, reduce the time spent on menial work and augment insurance professionals’ capabilities.
For example, AI and automation allow insurers to cut down on claim processing and underwriting times significantly and reap sizable cost savings. Tasks that once took months to finish are now accurately completed in the matter of minutes, opening the gate for insurers to focus on more complex and creative projects. Machine learning can help insurers and agents underwrite risk more effectively, using the large troves of customer data it has collected.
In short, innovative insurers who put their trust in computers to have knowledge and abilities that humans don’t and embrace AI to complete narrow cognitive tasks will reap the reward of freeing up time to deliver higher-value work/services to clients.
Predictive Recommendations
Thanks to companies like Amazon and Google, consumers are now accustomed to algorithms and the use of historical behavioral data to offer sales, search and product recommendations in their day-to-day lives. This same concept can apply to insurance, as AI constantly collects data and helps identify consumer patterns to reduce risk.
If utilized, AI can build predictive models for expense management, high value losses, reserving, settlement, litigation and fraudulent claims by using complex algorithms. These algorithms compare answers and information provided by customers to make appropriate recommendations for each risk scenario.
Forward-thinking insurers will leverage AI to streamline manual processes, cutting down on time and producing cost savings. Through automation, pattern spotting and machine learning, AI can assist agents in sorting through information and identifying cases that pose higher risk.
Unlike humans, AI systems share information globally in seconds. In turn, these systems constantly learn and adapt as more data is collected, thus eliminating the learning curve and contributing to the rapid growth and success of AI.
AI offers predictive recommendations that are backed by complex algorithms and data, and have the ability to analyze process flows for bottlenecks, improving overall company and customer satisfaction.
AI constantly works to better understand humans and their thought processes through machine learning, which allows AI to analyze human behavior and provide predictive consulting based on each individual’s wants and needs.
For the insurance industry, AI provides predictive consulting to provide better around the clock customer service. Whereas humans are unable to offer 24-hour support, AI systems like chat bots provide real-time feedback and insurance consulting to deliver quality service and improve the business’ bottom line.
With AI systems adopting more human capabilities, they could soon replace many functions of a typical independent agent. This technology can also improve internal processes and assist insurers in cutting down on time spent on mundane tasks, recommending new coverage for clients and finding solutions to improve on existing policies.
Executives must be willing to welcome AI with open arms to improve processes and deliver higher quality work. Assistance from AI tools will empower you to learn from and share knowledge with others.
With AI technology rapidly expanding, it’s critical that insurers keep up with industry trends to avoid becoming obsolete. Subscribe to our blog to stay in the loop on what’s happening in the insurance industry and how you can embrace new technology to improve processes and services.
Artificial Intelligence Predictive Models Insurance
Originally published at www.huffingtonpost.com on October 27, 2016.

California Health Insurance Company Sued For Barring HIV Patients From Pharmacies

Anthem Blue Cross, California’s largest for-profit health insurance company, is under fire for potentially targeting HIV-positive patients with its new prescription drug policy. Blue Cross is no longer allowing patients to pick up their HIV medications at a pharmacy, requiring them to instead go through a mail-order system — even though the policy hasn’t changed for people with other chronic conditions, like diabetes.
A consumer advocacy group has filed suit against the insurance company on behalf of an HIV-positive San Diego man, going by the pseudonym Jon Jones, who says he has incurred hundreds of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses now that he is no longer able to get his medications from his regular pharmacy. Jones asked Anthem Blue Cross for an exception to their new policy, but they refused — and now his lawyers are asking for an injunction to block the change:
Consumer Watchdog claims the change in programs is discriminatory under state civil rights law and potentially devastating for HIV/AIDS patients, many of whom rely on their local pharmacist to monitor potentially life-threatening adverse drug reactions.
According to the lawsuit, Blue Cross’ change will also cause consumers to lose access to drug discounts available only at retail pharmacies.
In addition to the serious health consequences of the program, patients’ fundamental right to privacy is also threatened because HIV/AIDS medications will be delivered to homes and businesses, according to the complaint.
Blue Cross says that any patients who feel the new requirement is causing them hardship may request an exception, although it’s unclear why Jones didn’t qualify for that.
Fortunately, Obamacare could help ensure that HIV positive individuals receive the best possible care from insurance companies. When the health reform law is fully implemented in 2014, insurers will no longer be able to treat HIV like a pre-existing condition and deny Americans coverage simply for having the virus. The health law will also eliminate lifetime caps on coverage, so HIV-positive individuals will be able to afford the care they need without reaching an arbitrary cut-off set by their insurance companies.

72 Million Will Go Without Health Insurance Under Romney’s Health Plan
By Annie-Rose Strasser

One of the myriad things presidential contender Mitt Romney has pledged to do on day one of his presidency is to repeal the Affordable Care Act, President Obama’s signature health care reform legislation, and replace it with “market drive” reforms. But a new study estimates that the effort would actually increase the number of uninsured Americans to 72 million and increase costs across the board.
The Commonwealth Fund report considered Romney’s proposal in full, including his plans to transform Medicare into a “premium support” structure and convert Medicaid into a block grant for the states. Romney would also “equalize the tax treatment of employer-based coverage and plans purchased in the individual insurance market,” allow insurance companies to circumvent state-based consumer protections to sell subprime plans “across state lines,” and push sicker Americans into expensive high-risk pools. The changes will make it harder for the 129 million Americans with pre-existing conditions to find coverage.
As a result, 72 million Americans would be unable to obtain insurance — more than if the Affordable Care Act had not become law in the first place:

Out-of-pocket spending and premiums would also increase, since Americans would lose “the combination of premium tax credits, limits on out-of-pocket spending, and consumer protections” that will reduce “costs for people purchasing coverage through the new insurance exchanges or the individual market”:

Romney’s plan would hit young adults between the ages of 19 and 29 the hardest, with an estimated 41.4 million uninsured (PDF) under his plan. That contrasts sharply to Obama’s health care reform, which will drop the uninsured in that age group down to 16 million, mainly thanks to the provision allowing adults up to 26 years old to remain on their guardians’ insurance.
The Republican candidate’s plan would also be particularly tough for low-income people or people living in poverty, who, under Obamacare, will be eligible for coverage in most states through the expansion of the Medicaid program. With Romney’s cuts to Medicaid, however, the number of uninsured people within 138 percent of the federal poverty line would grow from a baseline of 38.6 million to 43.7 million.

Renters Insurance vs Condo Owners Insurance
A common misconception among condo owners and residential renters is that if the building is insured then they are protected from potential loss. When it comes to insurance, knowledge is power! Once you realize that your personal belongings are not covered by the insurance that protects the building, the only thing left for you to decide is whether or not you have anything of value that you would like to be insured against loss.
The desired outcome of purchasing an insurance policy is to make you whole financially in situations that would otherwise leave you unprotected. There are a variety of insurance plans designed for many different situations, all carefully created as a safety net to protect the purchaser in case the unthinkable occurs. Condo owner’s insurance and renter’s insurance are similar types of policies, yet should be understood separately in order to know which is the right one to purchase.
Condo owner’s insurance is also known as the HO-6 policy, while the renters insurance policy is known as the HO-4 policy. They both protect the policy holders personal property from a wide range of hazards including fire, theft and smoke. Another similarity, and false assumption regarding these types of policies, is the fact that floods and earthquakes are not covered by these types of insurance. In some cases it is possible to buy a separate policy or rider for these situations, but it is important to know your situation and risk when speaking with your agent. Certain liability situations are also covered by both properties. For example, if an accident occurs within the home, the policy holder may be protected from liability claims that could otherwise be devastating.
Another common question for your agent revolves around the actual act of making you financially whole after a loss has occurred. Will your agent be offering actual cash value for your personal belongings, or will you be restored financially with the replacement cost of your goods? Actual cash value will provide you with compensation relative to what your goods were worth at the time of loss. Replacement cost would provide you with financial compensation in direct correlation with what it would cost to buy the goods new from a store.
Condo owner’s insurance provides additional coverage for replacement of permanent attachments or added fixtures inside the dwelling. This is important because a condo owner tends to consider their residence a long term home and will be likely to make upgrades suited to their lifestyle. On a related note, any structural parts of the building that are owned personally are protected. In addition, it is not uncommon for a condo owner’s association to charge a cost of common property loss if damage to a jointly owned area occurs. In these cases condo owners insurance would protect the policy holder from paying a larger than necessary amount of money out of pocket to their association.
Choosing the right policy is a critical step in protecting you and your belongings from loss, but once you make that choice then you can remain confident in the knowledge that you are protected from the unforeseen.

Oklahoma Is At It Again: State Legislature Passes Bill Stripping Abortion Coverage From Health Insurance
By Amanda Terkel

As ThinkProgress has reported, many far-right members of the Oklahoma legislature have made denying women rights a full-time mission. What the legislature has done in recent weeks:
— Both the House and the Senate passed a law mandating the collection of personal details about every single abortion performed in the state, which will then be posted on a public website.
— The legislature overrode the governor’s veto of an ultrasound mandate, which requires that doctor’s show women seeking an abortion ultrasounds of their babies and “describe the size of the fetus and any viewable organs and limbs. There are no exceptions for rape or incest.” The law also “limits who can do the ultrasound and which technology can be used — issues lawmakers are ill-equipped to decide.”
— The legislature also overrode the governor’s veto of a measure to prevent women from filing “wrongful life” lawsuits against “doctors who withhold information about a fetus or pregnancy that could cause a woman to seek an abortion.”
Yesterday, the Oklahoma House was at it again, this time passing a bill (HB 3290) by a 70–21 vote to bar private insurance companies from covering abortion. From the legislation:
No health plan, including health insurance contracts, plans or policies, offered outside of the state Exchange, but within the state, shall provide coverage for elective abortions except by optional separate supplemental coverage for abortion for which there must be paid a separate premium in accordance with subsection D of this act.
The bill does provide “exceptions in cases of rape and incest or to prevent the death of the mother.” Rep. Skye McNiel (R), the author of the legislation, said that it was simply meant to “ban state insurance exchanges created under the recently signed federal health care legislation from covering abortion procedures.” However, several legislators — including a Republican Rep. Doug Cox, who is also a doctor — spoke out against what the House was doing:
“This bill is nothing but pure politics so people can go home and stand up and beat their chests and say, ‘I voted against abortion of any type,’” Cox said. “You’re going to be trampling on some people who are good Christian people who are against abortion, but when it comes to one of these sad, terribly sad, freaks of nature that happen, you’re going to be punishing those good Christian people who are against abortion except in these cases.”
As CAP’s Jessica Arons has pointed out, making women purchase a separate abortion “rider” — as this legislation does — is discriminatory and requires women “to plan for a completely unexpected event.” Similarly, Rep. Jeannie McDaniel (D), who also voted against the bill, read a letter from a doctor who said that it’s unfair to require women to purchase special abortion coverage in advance because “a medically necessary termination of pregnancy is something that no family plans for or anticipates.” According to Cox, paying for abortion without insurance could cost a woman $10,000.
Oklahoma joins other states such as Arizona, Mississippi, and Tennessee in prohibiting insurers from offering abortion coverage in state exchanges, even if it’s paid for with private dollars.
State Sen. Steve Russell (R) recently tried to justify the abortion-reporting bill by saying, “This is not about women. It is about children in the womb deserving a life that got created.” The fact that lawmakers like Russell are leaving women’s interests out of the equation underscores the problem of what’s going on in Oklahoma.

The Insurance Agency’s Complete Guide to Social Media (+ 7 Skills to Master)

There are 192 million social media users in the US alone. Social media has staked its claim as the most effective marketing platform in the world. Love it or hate it, it is where your target market spends time.
Don’t believe me? Check out this graphic from Smart Insights:

Source: Smart Insights
That’s almost 60% of the country!
Here’s a brief introduction to the major social media platforms:
Facebook
This platform has the best targeting and ad creation features of any social network. With their in-depth analytics, you can track your results on a granular level.
You can target people based on their geographic locations, interests, and demographics. You can also opt to just get your post in front of those who have liked your page, or even friends of those people.
New features like Facebook Live and Facebook Notes gives you even more firepower. Facebook is also the quickest and, arguably, the best way to interact with your target market. Constant interaction with potential insurance leads results in actual conversions.
If you’re thinking that it’s just for Millennials, you’re wrong. In fact, the55 and older crowd is the fastest growing cohort on Facebook.

Source: Smart Insights
See that nearly 50 million of the 192 million users are over 50 years old.
For a more in-depth look at Facebook’s features, check out this post on 3 Facebook features you should be using right now.
Linkedin
LinkedIn is an important social platform that can improve your professional network. It’s unwise to leave it out of the equation as it has a formidable reputation in the insurance industry.
LinkedIn is the “professional” in the social media world. It differs from Facebook and Twitter because it’s more business-centric. It’s practically an online resume. This means it requires a different approach to ensure that you make the most out of it.
For more on Linkedin for financial advisors, check out this post.

Click image to read full post.
Instagram
This visuals-driven social media platform may seem like an uncommon choice. But, if you get clever about it, it can work well.
People are visual creatures. Most retain information better when presented with an image or a graphic.
Use Instagram to share interesting infographics, statistics, and the occasional fun picture.

Snapchat
With over 8 billion daily views, Snapchat has surpassed Twitter in the social media hierarchy. Gary Vaynerchuk has been touting SnapChat for years because of the attention it receives.
The reason it gets so much attention is because each snap (a photo or video) automatically deletes just seconds after it is opened. This creates a sense of urgency to take in the whole piece during that short window. Also, you’re pushed to be memorable and easily digestible in the time you have.
The limitations will drive you to be clever about not only your ideas, but in how you present them.

LifeHealthPro wrote a great post about using SnapChat here.
Twitter
A social media list is incomplete without Twitter. This microblogging platform is your gateway to a broader market.
The speed with which you can interact and react on Twitter makes it ideal for delivering content to a target audience. Apart from Facebook, it’s also the platform where users go to find answers to their questions. Use hashtags to tell other followers what your post is about and to organize your posts for searchers.
Think of Twitter as the ticker that goes across the bottom screen of ESPN. It’s a constant stream of information. Most users don’t mind seeing content more than once, so don’t be afraid to share quite often.
In case you want a simpler explanation to all of this, refer to this highly scientific chart.

Source: AddThis
Now that you’re armed with the basics of the major platforms, here are 7 social media skills financial advisors and insurance professionals need to succeed.
1) Teach, don’t sell
One of the mistakes advisors make on social is to continually push products or services. While there is certainly a time and place for calls-to-action, it can’t be your most common post.
Effective social media marketing is all about delivering compelling stories (content). These stories trigger emotions that can affect potential leads.
If social media is a vehicle, the content is the gas. Without it, your social media marketing will take you nowhere.

Use social media as a platform for educating your audience on the need for what you do.
Create helpful content.
Answer questions.
Share company updates.
But beware, being overly-promotional is a quick way to get ignored. Keep it educational.
2) Share other people’s content
It’s OK to share content from sources other than your own blog if it would add value to your audience. This shows that you are up-to-date with industry trends. It also shows good will on your part.
Followers will appreciate you for sharing good, informative article, no matter where it’s from.
3) Build rapport
Speaking of other people’s content, reach out to the users whose content you share to let them know. They may even share your content in return. This type of connection is what makes exponential growth possible.
With your followers, take the time to get to know them.
Actually read their posts.
Learn what interests them and the problems they are facing.
Engage.
Sometimes, it can be effective to simply let them know that you share that interest. Perhaps, you have a solution to their problems.
Build a relationship with your followers by showing your knowledge and expertise. Don’t just make a recommendation. Take time to explain it and give outside sources. Also, don’t push. This can’t feel like a sales pitch to them.
4) Use compelling images to capture people’s attention.
Social media platforms have become much more focused on visuals.
Sites like Instagram, SnapChat, and even Facebook are full of interesting graphics. Use images and visuals that are relatable, thought-provoking, fun, and informative.
If a picture really is worth a thousand words, think of how much you’ll say.

5) Leverage video to amplify your content
If photos can bring unspoken or unwritten messages and thoughts, videos can do a lot more. Create video content for YouTube, Facebook, SnapChat, Instagram, etc. All these have popular video platforms.
You can summarize your blog content in video form to get more engagement.
6) Optimize for mobile
Recent research shows that over 2 billion consumers use a smartphone. Did you know that more than half of Google searches are done using a mobile device?
In 2011, the average buyer invested 40 minutes per day using their mobile device. Today, this average has jumped to almost 2 hours.

Source: Smart Insights
This means your audience is on their smartphones longer than on their desktops.
Bottom line: your content must be easily viewed on mobile or you may as well not exist.
7) Have a purpose for every piece of content
Why did you sit down to create this content? Was it to get readers to subscribe to your blog? Follow you on Twitter? Sign up for a product demonstration?
Whatever your purpose is, make your content lead up to this. In many cases, you can ask the to take the desired action.
For example, place a call-to-action at the bottom of each blog post that tells readers to subscribe to your blog or schedule a consultation.
Note: It must be a reasonable next step. Don’t expect a new Linkedin connection to sign up for a product demo. Try going for lower commitments before asking for business.
Conclusion
Social media marketing is definitely uncharted territory for many insurance and financial advisors. But, if you can apply these principles, you’ll do well. To summarize:
Know the difference between platforms. People go to different sites for different reasons. Learn about each one and how to use it.
Take the right approach. Social media is not just another place to blast your message. Be educational, not promotional.
Be mindful of the visual nature of social media. Use images and video effectively.
What’s your practice doing with social media? Let me know! We’re always excited to learn what top advisors are doing.
If you need help with anything you’ve read here, give us a shout. We love helping financial advisors and insurance agency owners grow their businesses through social media.
Click here to contact us.

This originally appeared on the Advisors2Inbound Blog

Insurance Agency Email Marketing: 3 Quick Tips for Better ROI

Email marketing has the highest ROI of any marketing channel.
You read that right. Even in the age of social media and content marketing, email still sits atop the ROI rankings. It can be a huge boost for your insurance lead generation as well.
Follow these 3 simple rules for getting a better ROI from email marketing.
1) Understand your target audience (buyer persona)
Start by asking yourself some questions.
Who are you trying to reach?
How old are they?
What about their job keeps them up at night?
What are their interests and what turns them off?
Answer these questions to create more interesting email content that prospects can’t ignore. Focus on solving problems they are dealing with.

Source: Neil Patel
When you offer value in every email, you’ve got the basis for a winning formula.
2) Keep your list fresh
According to HubSpot, your email list will decay by about 22% every year. Most of that may be because people simply change their address from time to time.
You need to keep your email list updated.
Place calls-to-action (CTAs) on your site so visitors can subscribe or update their information.
Also, encourage connecting on social media to keep in contact in case of an address change.
Pro tip: keep an eye on your bounce and unsubscribe reports. Personally reach out to them to ask why they left. Sometimes, they do so by accident and will gladly re-subscribe.
3) Organize your email list into segments
Every email should be relevant to the recipient. Aim to make a personal impact on each person you send the email to.
You can’t send the same email to a 35-year old father-of-two and to a 60-year-old grandfather and expect the same results. It just won’t affect both of them the same way.
MailChimp, a leading email marketing software, tested email campaigns that were segmented by interest. Notice that clicks increased by almost 90%! That’s a business-changing statistic.

Organize your email list according to your buyer personas so that you can create emails that resonate. This way, each person who receives your email will be able to better relate to what you’re talking about.
If you try to please everyone, you’ll wind up somewhere in the middle, pleasing no one.
Conclusion
Insurance marketing through email can be an effective tactic, especially when done right. If you send the right message to the right person, you’ll get the best ROI possible.

This originally appeared on the advisors2inbound blog

For Indiana’s Small Business Owners, Community is the Bottom Line
Contributor Eric Miller owns and operates a local Allstate insurance agency in Crown Point, Indiana. He and his family are proud to call Crown Point home.
For better or worse, we live in a globalized world. Much of the food we serve our families comes from California farms, many of the toys we buy our children are assembled overseas and many of the decisions that impact our lives are debated in Washington, D.C. The remote nature of modern life may have been one of the reasons I listened when my dad suggested that I open a small business in my hometown of Crown Point, Indiana.
As my dad predicted, life as a small business owner, in my case offering insurance as an Allstate agency owner, has provided me with a sense of independence; more importantly, it has given me an opportunity to get involved in the community I have always called home.
I’m not unique. Small business owners across Indiana, and around the country, are as committed to their communities as they are to their bottom lines. In fact, according to the Allstate/USA TODAY Small Business Barometer — which combines federal data with a national survey of more than 2,600 small business owners, like myself — just one in five small business owners points to money as one of their top two motivators. For us, coaching a local little league team or volunteering our time to help others is worth more than any paycheck.
Last summer, I asked my fellow Allstate agents and owners of other small businesses to volunteer at a local nonprofit with me. For each agent who gave at least four hours of their time, The Allstate Foundation would donate $1,000 to the organization, through the Foundation’s Helping Hands® grants. I was extremely surprised and delighted when more than 40 people from across the state heeded my call, traveling from as far away as Indianapolis, Fort Wayne, Plymouth and Brownsburg, to participate in the project.
We spent the afternoon sprucing up Crown Point’s St. Jude House, a safe haven for victims of domestic violence and sexual assault. We gave the walls a fresh coat of paint, tore down two bathrooms so a plumber could make necessary repairs, power-washed the building’s exterior and landscaped the yard and gardens. Our small act of making a strange environment feel more like home raised more than $20,000 for St. Jude and will hopefully make it a little bit easier for the women and children who go there seeking safety and help.
It’s moments like these that remind me of the important role small businesses play in daily life and that explain why nearly 90 percent of owners believe the benefits of operating a small business outweigh the challenges.
Being a small business owner for the past 13 years has shown me that I can do my part right here in Crown Point to help my community one customer, one neighbor and one day at a time. And I encourage other small business owners to continue doing the same.

Study: 2,200 Vets Died Last Year Because They Lacked Health Insurance
By Alex Seitz-Wald

On the eve of Veterans Day, a team of researchers from Harvard Medical School has released a study finding that an estimated 2,266 veterans under the age of 65 died last year because they did not have health insurance. That “translates to six preventable deaths per day” and more than twice the number killed in Afghanistan since the war began in 2001.
Being uninsured raises a person’s odds of dying prematurely by 40 percent. The researchers found that 1.46 million veterans between the ages of 18 and 64 lacked insurance in 2008. While most veterans are eligible to receive excellent care from the Veterans Administration, those who were not injured in combat and whose income is above a certain threshold are often ineligible. Others are assigned low priorities, providing them with less consistent and more expensive access to care:
“Like other uninsured Americans, most uninsured vets are working people — too poor to afford private coverage but not poor enough to qualify for Medicaid or means-tested VA care,” said Dr. Steffie Woolhandler, a professor at Harvard Medical School. […]
Dr. David Himmelstein, the co-author of the analysis and associate professor of medicine at Harvard, commented, “On this Veterans Day we should not only honor the nearly 500 soldiers who have died this year in Iraq and Afghanistan, but also the more than 2,200 veterans who were killed by our broken health insurance system. That’s six preventable deaths a day.”
Unfortunately, health insurance is just one of many serious problems vets face. Up to one-in-five veterans of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan suffers from Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, while male vets face suicide rates double the national average. And, as the VA under President Obama recognized, veterans still account for up to a quarter of all homeless.
The fact that even veterans cannot receive adequate health care demonstrates that the current system is broken and in need of dramatic overhaul. A robust public option will guarantee that vets and all working-class Americans will be able to afford quality health insurance. Still, the study’s authors warn that the health care legislation “would do virtually nothing for the uninsured until 2013” and would “leave at least 17 million uninsured over the long run when reform kicks in,” leaving many veterans without care.
Update:
Politico reports, “Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid called Sen. Tom Coburn (R-OK) ‘illogical’ for holding up a veterans care bill Tuesday, criticizing the Oklahoma Republican for supporting war funding while blocking health care funding for veterans.”


The Future of Car Insurances
Yanosik is one of the most popular smartphone applications used by drivers in Poland. Though it not ousted CB-radio from the Polish roads, but won a large group of users. Now Yanosik developers planning together with ERGO Hestia (insurance company) to offer users the opportunity to buy mandatory insurance, and those who ride in accordance with the rules can get also special discounts.
Yanosik’s cooperation with the insurer is not surprising — it’s a very natural step. Yanosik directly reaches many drivers, Ergo Hestia has a product that drivers must buy. Symbiosis. However, insurers for a long time complained that business associated with the OC is average when it comes to profits. What besides raising rates insurer can do to make the business more profitable? Increase knowledge of the customers. And it might just give Yanosik and others acting similarly.
Yanosik collects data — that in the future will want to insurers
Insurers want to earn as much as possible, on the other hand, drivers want to pay as little as possible. It’s hard to find an agreement — always someone is less happy.
The option when you get the discount for non-accidents driving it’s fairly not the best. Why? Because it says not much about the driver. If you drive in the city like Warsaw, there is a big chance that you will have some small accident. I mean — no casualties, no severe damages, just two cars hit with the effect of broken lights or front / rear bumper. Everyone who drives a car knows that you can become an accident participant in a second. Very often, the accidents happen when you drive not faster than 30–40 km/h. For the insurer, it’s still an accident which causes a change in insurance regulations. Which means that if you provoke an accident, you will lose your discount. Does it mean that driver who causes such an accident is more dangerous than the driver who notoriously exceeds the speed in cities for example? I think not. From the other side, the driver who exceeds the speed often but he was never caught up by the police is the good driver from the insurer point of view.
Read full article on my blog Molicki.com

Building an American Insurance Bazaar
by mmoore
Recently — and this doesn’t happen very often — I had lunch with a number of Turkish military officers. One of them said, “I think your President Obama is trying to do something good for his people. Yet they are protesting in the streets. They don’t seem to want this health care reform. Why?”
I said Americans had a profound mistrust of government. The protesters — or the sane protesters, anyway — objected to a probable increase in taxes and regulation that would come with any reform. Above all, the idea of a law requiring people to buy something, even health insurance, made the natives restless.
The Turkish officer nodded. “I think things are very different in America.”
He wasn’t just being polite. He’d made port in Europe as well as the East Coast, and his impression was that Americans had a unique outlook on the world. He didn’t say this, but Turkish people tend to be impressed by Americans because they’re so free of European prejudice toward Turks. Modern Turkey and the U.S. have a lot in common — they’re both proud, powerful, nominally secular republics — and American prejudice relies on color, so it doesn’t kick in with a pale-skinned, sophisticated citizen of Ankara or Istanbul.
The Turkish officers said Turkey had a national health care system that offered a “green card,” a plan for free health care, to anyone with income below a certain level.
“It’s not perfect, because rich people still try to get green cards,” the officer said. Nevertheless, health care is considered a basic service in Turkey. It’s expensive for the government to maintain, but street protests in Turkey, as in Germany or France, would materialize only if politicians tried to take it away.
Normally I’m proud of American exceptionalism. But the reason for the mess in American health coverage has nothing to do with any maverick individualist tradition. Americans have inherited a largely accidental system of employer-based insurance that started during lean times in World War II. Wage freezes imposed by the government led employers to offer benefits instead of higher salaries. The slow institutionalization of this system is the reason Americans can’t carry their benefits from job to job or into self-employment; and it’s one reason we can’t think clearly about new ways to pay for health care.
The Baucus bill, now determining the shape of things to come, will only make things worse. It claims to be the most “business-friendly” plan in Congress because it doesn’t order all employers to offer health plans. But it does fine bosses who fail to offer coverage to needy workers. The idea is to compensate the government for covering those same workers. Some writers have called this so-called “free rider” provision an “employer mandate in sheep’s clothing,” but really it’s worse than that: It amounts to a government incentive to keep needy workers out of a job.
The bill has a few good provisions, like a competitive health insurance exchange in every state — a virtual bazaar for basic coverage, which I’ve argued for in this column — but it grants this broad new freedom of choice to employers, not individuals. Ezra Klein recommends “phasing in Ron Wyden’s free-choice amendment” to open the bazaar to individuals. That would make insurance portable and drive down costs by introducing real competition to the health care market.
The insurance exchanges should also be national, not state-restricted — the idea for a national exchange was in Baucus’ bill last year.
But the last thing large insurers want is real competition. The lack of any such thing in the bills taking shape in Washington is a transparent reason for their success: The insurance industry, like the pharmaceuticals industry, sees the current direction of reform — universally mandated insurance, plus little change in the marketplace — as a chance to drum up business.
A truly competitive and well-regulated insurance bazaar would be a unique American solution to the universal problem of health coverage. The simple and conventional alternative would be a public option. A year ago the Baucus bill included one of those, too. But that was before this summer’s bloody rhetorical cockfights and all the protesters in the street.
Sign up for our free e-newsletter.
Are you on Facebook? Become our fan.
Follow us on Twitter.
Add our news to your site.

Essential Health Benefits Will Cost More Than Bare Bones Insurance Plans…And That’s A Good Thing
By Igor Volsky
Last night, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) released its recommendations to the Department of Health and Human Services for defining essential health benefits — the standard benefits insurers will have to offer beginning in 2014. As Sarah Kliff explains, the institute had to balance “affordability against comprehensiveness,” find a way to please patient advocacy groups who “want to ensure that the benefit package is comprehensive, providing robust coverage for a wide array of medical conditions,” and industry groups who “worry that a sweeping benefit package could prove unaffordable.” Ultimately, IOM didn’t provide HHS with specifics, but offered a framework that erred on the side of affordability: it recommended that HHS model the package on the more modest benefits offered by small businesses to ensure that everyone can access the basic plan and that the central purpose of the Affordable Care Act is realized.
But Republicans — who have offered to deregulate the insurance industry almost entirely — are already speaking out against the recommendation. Sen. Mike Enzi (R-WY) offered this condemnation:
Small businesses can’t sustain these increases, especially when combined with the increases that will inevitably result from the more expensive essential health benefits packages mandated by the new law,” said Senator Enzi. “Employers need flexibility when determining what type of health insurance to provide their employees, so they can afford to continue offering coverage. Too many small businesses are already running the numbers and deciding they can’t afford to make payroll and pay for health care. The number of small businesses offering coverage decreased 11 percent this year, and rigid benefit packages will make this even worse.” […]
 
“It is simple math that as more mandated benefits are included, the higher the costs will be,” Senator Enzi said. “As more regulations are published and more requirements are enacted, premiums will continue to increase which will likely lead to more small employers dropping coverage.
The purpose of the essential benefit rules, however, isn’t to burden businesses or individuals with new costs or unnecessary and unproven benefits, but to establish a floor of basic coverage that will allow companies to compete on cost rather than quality and guarantee that the most vulnerable parts of the population have access to the basic care they need. Beneficiaries will determine how much they pay for their benefits — insurers will offer bronze, silver, gold or platinum plans that will cover a certain percentage of the cost — but all new policies will provide comprehensive coverage and preventive care that is essential to maintaining good health. That’s a far cry from the deregulated markets that Republicans are proposing — in which insurers sell subprime policies that beneficiaries can never count on if they actually fall ill. That kind of coverage may be cheaper, but it’s also worthless for maintaining health and treating major disease.

Catholic University Dropped Students’ Health Insurance For Fear Of Eventually Covering Birth Control

The Obamacare provision that requires insurance companies to cover contraceptive services with no additional co-pay has broad public support, but has still remained one the most politically contentious aspects of the health reform law. Despite the fact that the Obama Administration provides an exemption for religiously-affiliated organizations that may object to covering birth control, religious organizations across the country have continued to resist Obamacare.
Those fights over birth control have been spearheaded by religious universities and for-profit organizations, despite the fact that those types of institutions may have hundreds of students or employees who don’t share the same objection to contraceptive services. Obamacare opponents have been going to extreme lengths to drag out the largely failed “religious liberty” fight.
In fact, one Roman Catholic university in Ohio, Franciscan University, actually dropped health coverage for its entire student body last year simply because its officials were afraid of “one day having to provide coverage for contraception.” A federal judge recently dismissed Franciscan University’s lawsuit against the federal government and blasted its decision to deny health insurance plans from its more than 2,500 students:
U.S. District Judge Algenon Marbley sided with the government, saying the groups couldn’t prove they would ever likely suffer the harm they allege. He noted that 15 other federal courts have already ruled similar lawsuits weren’t timely and most of those 15 decisions determined the groups filing the lawsuits lacked jurisdiction.
The judge also criticized Franciscan University over its decision in May to drop its student health insurance program out of fear of one day having to provide coverage for contraception.
Marbley said the university can’t argue harm based on “a phantom specter” created by its own fears, which the government has stated are unsubstantiated, Marbley said.
“It is gravely unfortunate that Franciscan’s students have lost the opportunity to receive health insurance coverage from the University,” the judge said.
Overall, the Catholic Church has actually been largely supportive of efforts to expand access to health care, which the Church considers to be a basic human right. During the political battle to pass the Affordable Care Act, Catholic nuns filed a brief in support of the health reform law, explaining that the government has a “moral imperative” to ensure care for people who cannot afford insurance. The Catholic bishops have obviously taken issue with some provisions of the reform law, but they also admit that they can “recognize the good present in the bill.”
However, rather than weigh the positive effects of health coverage against their opposition to birth control, Franciscan University simply decided to throw out its student health insurance plans altogether. And university officials show no signs of letting up, despite their defeat in court. As Father Terence Henry, Franciscan’s president, said in a statement, “We will not stop fighting this unjust mandate, and we are in this for the long haul.”

Were McCain’s High-Risk Insurance Pools Better Than Obama’s?
By Igor Volsky
Yesterday, our old friend and former McCain campaign adviser Douglas Holtz-Eakin wrote an editorial distancing the former presidential candidate from the high-risk insurance pools in the new health care law. President Obama has argued that the program — a temporary measure designed to provide coverage for individuals who are uninsured for at least six months — was modeled off of McCain’s proposal to cover every American with a pre-existing condition in state-based high-risk policies, and has touted the provision as an example of the Republican ideas contained in the health care bill.
Under the law, a state can meet the new HRP requirements (the pools have to cover at least 65 percent of costs, have limited out-of-pocket expenditures, have no exclusions for pre-existing conditions and cost no more than a standard rate for a standard population) by 1) improving the affordability standards in its existing program, 2) building a new pool that meets the federal requirements or 3) allowing the federal government to enroll its residents into a national program. Holtz-Eakin takes exception to the notion that this has anything to do with what his boss was proposing on the campaign trail:
In contrast, McCain’s GAPs would have emphasized best practice as a condition for federal assistance — including permitting GAPs to band together with other states’ GAPs to enlarge pools, purchase coverage across state lines and lower overhead costs.
It would have provided incentives for use of innovative tools to reduce health care costs. As a condition of federal assistance, states would have permitted a broad range of insurance, including preferred-provider organizations and health savings accounts. McCain’s GAPs would have addressed both cost and coverage, improved competition in insurance markets and expanded the quality of insurance offerings.
In addition, McCain’s plan would have put serious money behind the needs of those with costly conditions. How much? More than $20 billion annually, according to Lewin Group estimates.
There is a clear bottom line: Obamacare marches into a state with no regard for the existing high-risk strategy and no attempt to coordinate to achieve sensible coverage, competition and budgetary outcomes. In return, states get a temporary program with a 2014 expiration date.
Thus, at its best, it is a bandage that won’t foster market reforms.
I’m not going to deny that there are some differences here, but I also don’t believe that the Democrats were under any kind of obligation to adopt McCain’s “GAPs” since the senator ultimately voted against the measure, along with every other Republican. The final provision was a compromise between McCain’s proposal and Democrats’ principles but the basic concept is the same incredibly expensive proposition: bring all the sick people together, put them in a single risk pool and see how much that costs you. Holtz-Eakin says that McCain would have put “serious money” behind the proposal, more than $20 billion annually. But during the campaign, he suggested that far less would be needed.
“When Mr. McCain unveiled his high-risk pool proposal, his chief domestic policy adviser, Douglas Holtz-Eakin, the former director of the Congressional Budget Office, estimated the federal cost at $7 billion to $10 billion. Mr. Holtz-Eakin said five million to seven million uninsured people would be singled out for coverage,” the New York Times reported in July of 2008. “But in a recent interview, Mr. Holtz-Eakin emphasized that the projections “could change dramatically” depending on how the program was structured.”
The point of all this is to say that HRP are just a very expensive way of doing business, no matter whose version you consider. The states that are choosing to opt out of the program are arguing that $5 billion over three and a half years is not nearly enough and who’s to say that they would be satisfied with the kind of funding McCain was proposing? According to a 2008 report from the Tax Policy Center, using high-risk pools “to prevent large losses in insurance coverage among the sick and needy” would require far more than $100 billion over 10 years. The real cost would be “on the order of $1 trillion over ten years given projected health care costs.”
No matter how much better Holtz-Eakin believes McCain’s proposal was at containing costs, he can’t possible agree that the GAPs were sustainable over the long term. Obama’s approach is an interim measure which may require more funding, but at least it ends once the exchanges begin.

Insurance: Part 2

Yesterday I riffed a little bit on what insurance might look like in a driver-less car world.
Today, MarketWatch carries a press release from a report hypothesizing that driver-less cars may kill the auto insurance industry.
Actually, they don’t come out and say that in so many words. Instead, they write:
As the risk of accidents will fall drastically with the advent of autonomous vehicles, the insurance premium to cover that risk too will drop significantly. Nevertheless, original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) and suppliers will increase insurance spend to cover their share of product liability risk, thereby offsetting the shrinkage in consumer-driven insurance revenues.
With OEMs and tier 1 suppliers looking to ensure fool proof product safety, methods to access risk and certify the product will assume greater importance. The traditional method of underwriting that uses historic data will take a back-seat, paving the way for a new breed of underwriters capable of evaluating driving algorithms and assigning a relevant risk priority number.
I think the translation there is that disruption is coming to the auto insurance industry.
As Warren Buffett said:
“If you could come up with anything involved in driving that cut accidents by 30 percent, 40 percent, 50 percent, that would be wonderful,” he said at a conference in March. “But we would not be holding a party at our insurance company.”
Originally published at www.davidincalifornia.com on October 20, 2015.

Steve King: Young Congressmen Should Be On Govt Health Insurance, Not ‘Mommy And Daddy’s’ Policy
By Igor Volsky
This evening, Rep. Steve King (R-IA) explained that he opposed a provision in the Affordable Care Act that would allow children to stay on their parents’ insurance until age 26 because it could permit some younger members of Congress to “still be on mommy and daddy’s health insurance policy” when they’re elected*. King explained that all members should take responsibility for their own government-sponsored health insurance plans:
KING: What a lot of people don’t know in this country is that there are at least two members of this Congress that were elected before age 26 and had Obamacare been implemented before they had been elected to office, they would have, could have, been on their parents health insurance plan. Now isn’t that a nice thing when you wean them off of their parents’ health insurance plan and you transfer them over and put a pin on their lapel and say, ‘now run the country!’ They haven’t had a single minute of their own health insurance coverage until they get here and actually we have a responsibility for it here.
Watch it:

Later in the speech, King inadvertently made the case for the individual mandate when he defended the right of insurance companies to “discriminate” against individuals with pre-existing conditions. King argued that insurers should be able to ban individuals who waited to purchase coverage after becoming sick because property and casualty insurers can disqualify individuals who purchase a policy just as their houses catch on fire. Watch that HERE.
The individual mandate, however, would prevent this kind of gaming of the system by encouraging Americans to purchase insurance before they become sick.
* It’s unclear who King was referring to, however, since it appears that everyone in this Congress was over 26 years of age when elected. I have asked his office to clarify.

Steve King: States Can Mandate That People Purchase Health Insurance Coverage
By Igor Volsky
Rep. Steve King (R-IA) discussed Mitt Romney and Newt Gingrich’s history of supporting an individual mandate after the ABC News/Iowa GOP Debate in Des Moines, IA with CaffThoughts and agreed with Romney’s argument that states have the right to require residents to purchase health insurance coverage. The comment is revealing since some conservatives — including King’s friend Michele Bachmann — have argued that state mandates are also unconstitutional. Watch his comments toward the end of the video:


Bachmann On Medicaid Expansion: ‘A Great Number Of Those People Already Have Health Insurance’

Last night, Rep. Michelle Bachmann (R-MN) cautioned against Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion, telling Fox’s Greta Van Susteren that “a great number” of the people who would be eligible for the expansion — many of whom live in conservative states that have pledged to deny the program — already have health insurance:
VAN SUSTEREN: But the people that are in this window. This 133 percent.
BACHMANN: If you make 133 percent above poverty.
VAN SUSTEREN: Those people, the thinking under Obamacare is that they would be covered by Medicaid expansion, right?
BACHMANN: But remember, it isn’t that all those people don’t have health insurance now. A great number of those people already have health insurance.
Watch it:

Under Obamacare, those people Bachmann cites would indeed be able to keep their health insurance if they have it. The Medicaid expansion — which the federal government will bankroll from 2014–2016 and then pay 90 percent of costs thereafter — is designed to incorporate those who do not yet have health insurance.
In fact, millions of newly eligible people would be denied coverage if various Republican governors make good on their promise to impede the Medicaid expansion. In Florida, for example, Republican Gov. Rick Scott has promised to reject the Medicaid expansion, denying 1 million new Floridians health insurance.
When pressed by Van Susteren on who would foot the bill for uncompensated care when an uninsured person “ends up in a serious car accident,” Bachmann dismissed the question. “That’s the example the president continues to give, but that’s a tiny percentage,” she argued. “The answer is to bring down the price of health care.”
In 2008, the federal government spent nearly $50 billion on uncompensated care, and the Medicaid expansion would ultimately bring down costs. The Urban Institute estimates that 21 to 45 states will save money by taking the Medicaid expansion, and doctors and hospitals wouldn’t be forced to foot the bill for uncompensated care.
— Steven Perlberg

Wild Weather Is The New Normal And Insurance Companies Must Act

Severe weather has been clobbering insurance companies, and the headlines just keep coming. “Drought to cost insurers billions in losses,” said the Financial Times a few days ago. “Many U.S. hurricanes would cause $10b or more in losses in 2012 dollars,” the Boston Globe said about the latest hurricane forecasts. “June’s severe weather losses near $2 billion in U.S.,” said the Insurance Journal earlier this year.
This year’s extreme events follow the world’s costliest year ever for natural catastrophe losses, including $32 billion in 2011 insured losses in the United States due to extreme weather events. This is no short-term uptick: insured losses due to extreme weather have been trending upward for 30 years, as the climate has changed and populations in coastal areas and other vulnerable places have grown.
The U.S. insurance industry continues to be “surprised” by extreme weather losses. But the truth is that weather extremes are no longer surprising. Back-to-back summers of devastating droughts, record heat waves and raging wildfires are clear evidence of this. Last year’s crazy weather triggered near record underwriting losses and numerous credit rating downgrades among U.S. property and casualty insurers.
And in the face of a changing climate, such events can be expected to increase in number, and severity. It’s time for insurance companies to recognize this new normal, and incorporate it into their business planning — for the sake of their shareholders, their industry’s survival, and the stability of the U.S. economy.
Ceres, a business sustainability leadership organization, has been researching the effects of climate change and severe weather on the insurance sector. In a report to be released next month, titled Stormy Future for U.S. Property and Casualty Insurers, we will detail our recommendations for insurance companies, investors and regulators to help strengthen the insurance sector so it can better weather the challenges ahead.
For insurance companies, using catastrophe models that can better anticipate probable effects of climate change on extreme weather events are key. And especially in vulnerable markets, insurers’ guidance on insurability should inform decisions that communities make on land-use planning, infrastructure decisions, and building codes.
Insurers can also encourage the transition to a low-carbon economy — one built to forestall the worst effects of climate change — by offering products and services that encourage clean and efficient energy, encouraging customers to adopt climate-change mitigation plans, and encouraging policymakers to act to reduce carbon pollution.
This would not be the first time insurance companies have helped change American society. By making insurance contingent on smoke detectors, insurers cut down on deaths and losses from building fires. By backing seat belt laws and including seat belt violations in rate calculations, they helped save lives on the road.
By engaging fully on climate change and energy policy — inside and outside of the boardroom — insurance companies can lead the way once again. It would be the right thing to do, both for their business, and for our future.
Mindy Lubber is President of Ceres and Director of the Investor Network on Climate Risk. This piece was originally published at Ceres and was reprinted with permission.

Rick Perry: Extending Private Health Insurance To Everyone Is ‘A Huge Problem’
By Igor Volsky
Rick Perry took a shot at Mitt Romney’s Massachusetts health care law this morning during his first one-on-one sit down interview with Laura Ingraham. The 2006 measure, which has extended health care coverage to some 98 percent of state residents, is a “huge problem,” Perry predicted, saying that the plan paved the way for Obamacare:
INGRAHAM: What makes you a better decision-maker on health care issues than he is?
PERRY: I think he’s finally recognizing that the Massachusetts health care plan that he passed is a huge problem for him. And yea, it was not almost perfect. I truly believe that you have to have the free market in play with out health care. I think Obamacare, which was modeled after the Massachusetts plan, was an absolute debacle.
Listen:

But the Bay State’s landmark legislation is only problematic if Republican primary voters believe that extending private health care coverage to state residents is a liability. As a result of the law, almost every child is covered, more private companies are offering insurance, and state spending on uncompensated care is decreasing (the state spent $405 million on uncompensated care in 2010, nearly $300 million less than before reform was enacted in 2006.)
Instead, Perry is suggesting that his own health care record is an asset. That a state with the highest uninsured rate in the nation — 26 percent — health premiums well above the national average, drastic cuts in reimbursement rates to hospitals, and severe doctor shortages, has a health care system to be envied? The comparison of the top-line indicators is less than flattering:
Uninsured populationUninsured childrenAverage Annual Percent GrowthInfant MortalityTexas6.2 Million (26%)1.3 Million (18%)7.4%6.3Massachusetts323,500 (5%)51,400 (3%)6.3%5.0
Still, Perry believes that he, not Romney, should serve as a model for health care reform. In July 2010, he proclaimed that Texas has “the best health care in the country,” and if Republican primary voters agree with his assessment, it will only underscore the party’s animosity towards the millions of Americans who can’t afford insurance.


The opportunities are just some of the reasons why the Chartered Insurance Institute is delighted to support this research into the challenges facing the insurance community as it looks to ensure it remains relevant to the changing needs of a changing society.
The brave new world is right now, and throwing up opportunities for insurance to demonstrate its value to customers — in both personal and commercial lines — embracing on-demand, lifestyle solutions and new emerging risks.
And an opportunity to be more transparent with customers to explain how insurance works — both key to improving customer trust in the insurance profession.
Insurance companies need to show increased readiness to partner with challengers in order to accelerate their own digital transformation.
Our survey finds an industry with a growing appetite for innovation and a window of opportunity in which to leverage data flows from the Internet of Things combined with the power of artificial intelligence and the security of blockchain to deliver its own game-changing disruption.
Read more

@FGraillot: “Great report from @MarketforceBM on the future of insurance. #InsurTech #AI #blockchain” open tweet »

The Decline of Private Health Insurance
By Matthew Yglesias
I’m not very interested in the underlying dispute between Scott Winship and Mike Konczal, but I did think this Winship chart about health insurance was interesting:

I emailed Winship to ask him what this data looks like if we examine the under-65 crowd. To the eyeball, at least, the big story on this chart seems to be the creation of Medicare and then the aging of the population pushing a larger share of people into Medicare-eligibility. The answer turns out to be a bit interesting. Look at private insurance among working age people:

This decline in private health insurance coverage has, however, been entirely offset by an increase in the number of working age people on Medicaid, which stood at 13 percent in 2008. Among the under-18 set, private insurance is even rarer and public coverage even more common, since children are both poorer-than-average and politically easier to cover. In terms of causation, my understanding is that this is a blend of Medicaid “crowding out” private coverage and Medicaid filling a gap in private insurance’s affordability. The Affordable Care Act is going to continue this trend by substantially expanding Medicaid coverage.

Rick Perry Explains Why Texans Don’t Need Health Insurance
By Igor Volsky
“In the state of Texas, no one is not covered [with health insurance],” Rick Perry — governor of the state with the highest rate of uninsured residents in the country — explained to the Des Moines Register this afternoon. But he then caught himself and clarified, “Covered, is the wrong word. No one does not have access to some of the best health care in the world. The state and its legislature, through the election by the citizens, have put into place programs that do not require insurance or make it available in some cases.” In other words, since everyone has access to health care, it’s not neccessary for all to have health insurance coverage. Watch it:


Republicans Embrace Insurance Industry Funded Study On Premiums Increases
By Igor Volsky
Senior Republicans have embraced the now-discredited insurance industry funded study on premium increases in the Senate Finance Committee’s health bill. While careful to not directly connect the study to the insurance industry, Republicans cite the study’s claim that premiums will increase by $4,000 and disingenuously argue that the Congressional Budget Office agrees with the insurance industry’s conclusions:
- Sen. Jon Kyl (R-AZ): CBO, and Milliman and PriceWaterhouse all agree that insurance premiums for families in America will go up.
- Sen. John Cornyn (R-TX): I would like to go back to some of the discussion of the PriceWaterhouse Coopers study that was released and which has been criticized because it was paid for by the insurance industry…it would be a cruel outcome indeed if in fact, unintentionaly we actually increased their health insurance costs.
- Sen. Jim Bunning (R-KY): And a recent study suggests that American families will pay more than $4,000 in 2019 because of this bill.
Watch it:

As Congressional Budget Office director Douglas Elmendorf pointed out, the budget office did not conclude that premiums would increase under reform. “There are a variety of forces working on affecting private insurance premiums and the amounts that people would pay for health insurance and some of the changes in the proposal would tend to push down those premiums and some would tend to push up those premiums. And because there are so many conflicting forces, we have not been able to assess the impact on premiums,” Elmendorf said.
The insurance industry was correct to argue that a weak individual mandate would increase premiums — the final Senate bill needs to improve on the Finance bill’s affordability measures. But the industry’s very selective analysis undermines its conclusions and exposes the study as an industry attempt to protect the bottom line. An actual analysis of Congressional Budget Office data has concluded that premiums in the exchange would be lower than they are in the none group market today.

Guardian Launches Innovation Challenge: How can we encourage Millennials to buy and be loyal to our life insurance?

Millennials are getting married, buying homes, having children, and making other major life decisions later and later in life compared to generations before them. Buying life insurance is no exception. As the largest generation in history, Millennials are becoming a dominant force in the economy, with a projected $10 trillion of spending power over the course of their lifetime. The company that successfully figures out how to market and sell insurance to Millennials, and even more importantly keep them loyal and engaged for decades to come, will have a serious competitive advantage in the insurance industry. We, as a life insurance company, know it is difficult to target selling to the Millennial generation and we are looking to figure out what we can do to make you interested. What would make you loyal to an insurance company after purchasing a policy to keep you from switching companies and to keep you interested in buying other products from the same company?
MindSumo hosts challenges for Guardian and over 250 other companies to help generate unique ideas and insights from a community of over 300K US college students.
Learn more about how we can help you, and what we’ve done for other clients.

How to Deal With an Insurance Claim and the Glass Repair Company

You are driving in the freeway to get to work and a rock hits your windshield and cracks it. Later in the day, you take the car to an auto glass repair shop to get an expert’s opinion. He then recommends that you file an insurance claim because the repair or replacement can be costly.
This is something that can happen to anyone driving in Utah, New York or Florida. According to business news website Insurance Journal, glass damage is the most frequent vehicle claim.
In total, there are 7.5 million glass damage claims every year and 80 percent of those claims are windshield damage.
In most cases, insurance companies ask that the car owner files an online claim. Some of them, like GEICO, have a video guide. Others like State Farm use images like the following to help you know how to report your claim.

Most insurance companies’ websites claim that it takes about 30 minutes at the auto glass repair shop to get the windshield repaired. This time estimate is probably about the same in small places like Utah or bigger places like New York.
After submitting the claim, insurance companies have different approaches on how to choose an auto glass repair shop. Some have a list of pre-approved list of shops. Others will work with several shops that are willing to agree to a certain price until they arrange a deal. Some, like Farmers Insurance, seem to not care too much about that, and will even reimburse you for a repair that has already been made.
In general, you may choose your preferred auto glass repair shop, but remember that some insurance companies have to agree on a certain price with the shop. This may change depending on the insurance company, but not on where you live, whether that is Utah or elsewhere in the nation.
The auto glass repair shop may consider that the windshield does not need to be replaced, but only to be repaired. Some insurances companies will cover the deductible and the repair in this case. At times it depends on your policy coverage.
For more details on specific policies and how they work, go to your insurance company’s website or talk to one of their representatives.
And make sure the next time you are driving in the mountains of Utah or in the streets of New York that you avoid hitting objects with your windshield.
Esteban De Hoyos is an automotive writer. Information provided by Diamond Glass. He writes for Fusion 360, an advertising agency in Utah.

Perry Proposed A Bi-National Health Insurance Plan With Mexico In 2001
By Marie Diamond

The ghosts of Gov. Rick Perry’s (R-TX) more moderate past have come back to haunt him in recent days, particularly when it comes to health care.
In 2001 at a border summit in south Texas, Perry spoke optimistically about the prospects for a “bi-national health insurance” program that would cover both U.S. and Mexican residents along the border. He also praised the Texas legislature’s bill to increase funding for Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program.
Given that Perry now considers Medicaid to be unconstitutional, the speech reads like it comes from another world — or an entirely different person:
There are other challenges that require a unified approach, especially in the area of health care. […] I urged legislators to pass a telemedicine pilot program that will enable, through technology, a sick border resident of limited financial means to receive care from a specialist hundreds of miles away.
But the effort to combat disease and illness requires greater cooperative efforts between our two nations. It is a simple truth that disease knows no boundaries. […] We have much to gain if we work together to expand preventative care, and treat maladies unique to this region.
Legislation authored by border legislators Pat Haggerty and Eddie Lucio establishes an important study that will look at the feasibility of bi-national health insurance. This study recognizes that the Mexican and U.S. sides of the border compose one region, and we must address health care problems throughout that region. That’s why I am also excited that Texas Secretary of State Henry Cuellar is working on an initiative that could extend the benefits of telemedicine to individuals living on the Mexican side of the border.
In the speech, Perry also extols the need for more preventative medicine and brags about how the legislature “expanded access to Medicaid for more low-income children” and increased Medicaid funding by $4 billion. His past praise for a “unified,” transnational health care program is a stark contrast with the view he expresses in his recent book Fed Up, where he posits that the Constitution forbids a “federally operated program of pensions” and “a federally operated program of health care.”
The remarks paint a refreshing picture of an enlightened, compassionate Perry who is informed about the benefits of preventative health care and Medicaid and has sympathy for poor border residents and undocumented immigrants.
The Perry campaign is, predictably, trying to downplay the speech. Campaign spokeswoman Katherine Cesinger tried to distance Perry from the proposal, saying, “A bill was passed by the Legislature that authorized a study to look into this issue, which ultimately concluded there were numerous barriers to accomplishing that idea, and the Legislature took no further action on this concept.”
Perry has also faced scrutiny this week for a 1993 letter he wrote as Texas Agricultural Commissioner praising then-First Lady Hillary Clinton for her efforts to reform the health care system. That legislation was brought down by mass GOP opposition and “Hillarycare” is still derided by conservatives as the precursor to “Obamacare.”

Low Wages And No Health Insurance In Texas
By Igor Volsky
Paul Krugman reiterates the wage disparity between states in the Northeast and Texas and I would just add that all of this has some serious consequences when it comes to health care coverage:

Of the 211,000 jobs Texas created last year, the Bureau of Labor Statistics tells us that 37 percent paid at or below minimum wage. The state now has the most minimum-wage workers (550,000 in all) in the nation and that naturally translates into a growing demand for Medicaid. In fact, the number of Texans eligible for the program has soared from 2.1 million in 2001 to 3.5 million today and the uninsured rate has also skyrocketed to an astounding 26 percent — the worst in the nation for health care coverage.
The low wage economy also means a low tax structure and constant funding shortages. As a result, lawmakers this year cut $805 million from doctors serving Medicaid patients and postponed $4 billion in Medicaid costs for payment in the next budget cycle. The latest state budget also included an 8 percent cut in reimbursement rates to hospitals, which came on top of a 2 percent cut in the last budget, in addition to a 23 percent cut to trauma care funding.

Man Doesn’t Use Health Insurance to Get Lower Bill

So we canceled the surgery and started the scheduling process all over again, this time classifying my patient as a “self-pay” (or uninsured) patient. I quoted him a reasonable upfront cash price, as did the anesthesiologist. We contacted a different hospital and they quoted him a reasonable upfront cash price for the outpatient surgical/nursing services. He underwent his operation the very next day, with a total bill of just a little over $3,000, including doctor and hospital fees. He ended up saving $17,000 by not using insurance. This process taught us a few things. First, most people these days don’t have health “insurance.” They have prepaid health plans. They pay premiums to take advantage of a pre-negotiated fee schedule arranged for and administered by a third party. My patient, on the other hand, had insurance.
Depending on what kind of health insurance plan you have, there are certain cases where it’s just cheaper to “self-pay” without insurance to take advantage of the markdown given to patients who pay in cash. This is a story about one of those cases, though it’s a story that is politicized in the end.
Photo: Fotos GOVBA

Real-life ‘Norma Rae’ dies of cancer after her health insurance refused to cover her medications.
By Amanda Terkel

Crystal Lee Sutton, whose courageous efforts organizing Southern textile mills inspired the award-winning 1979 film “Norma Rae,” passed away on Friday after a long battle with brain cancer. Sutton’s story is particularly tragic because after fighting her whole life for rights of working Americans, her health insurance wouldn’t cover the medications she needed:
She went two months without possible life-saving medications because her insurance wouldn’t cover it, another example of abusing the working poor, she said.
“How in the world can it take so long to find out (whether they would cover the medicine or not) when it could be a matter of life or death,” she said. “It is almost like, in a way, committing murder.”
Although Sutton eventually received the medication, the cancer had already taken a toll on her.

Tom Coburn Predicts The End Of Private Health Insurance
By Igor Volsky

Sen. Tom Coburn (R-OK) — a vocal opponent of health care reform — made several apocalyptic predictions about the U.S. health care system during an appearance at the Republican Women’s Club of Tulsa County on Tuesday:
“There will be no insurance industry left in three years,” Coburn told the Republican Women’s Club of Tulsa County.
“That is by design. You’re going to make insurance unaffordable for everyone — which is what they want. Because if there’s no private insurance left, what’s left? Government-centered, government-run, single-payer health care.”
Coburn apparently based his prediction on reported hikes in private insurance premiums, increases he attributed to the new law. […]
Coburn, facing re-election on Nov. 2, said it will be “the beginning of the end of America” if the reform bill’s so-called individual mandate is not revoked or thrown out by the courts.
As the Wonk Room points out, from saying that health reform would cause seniors to “die sooner” to wishing that Sen. Robert Byrd (D-WV) couldn’t vote for the health bill, Coburn has a history of making bizarre comments about reform.

Do You Have Health Insurance? Y/N

Yesterday on Twitter, musician Amanda Palmer asked her Twitter followers to answer four questions: 1. What country did they live in? 2. What did they do? 3. Did they have insurance? 4. How much did they pay? She had people tag their answers #InsurancePoll. She received thousands of responses from around the world. Here is a sampling of some of the responses from the U.S. (For more in-depth responses, check out our mini-survey of friends from May.)
[&amp;amp;amp;lt;a href=”http://storify.com/logansachon/insurancepoll" target=”_blank”&amp;amp;amp;gt;View the story “#InsurancePoll” on Storify&amp;amp;amp;lt;/a&amp;amp;amp;gt;]

